              Speeding Up Sum-Check Proving (Extended Version)∗

               Quang Dao†                       Zachary DeStefano‡                    Suyash Bagad§
           qvd@andrew.cmu.edu                    zd2131@nyu.edu                   suyash@ingonyama.com
                          Yuval Domb§                                        Justin Thaler¶
                     yuval.domb@gmail.com                             justin.r.thaler@gmail.com
                                                     March 24, 2026


                                                          Abstract
           The sum-check protocol is a foundational primitive in modern cryptographic proof systems, but
       its prover-side cost has emerged as a concrete bottleneck. This paper introduces three complementary
       techniques that significantly reduce sum-check proving time and memory, especially in the context of
       zero-knowledge virtual machines (zkVMs).
           First, for applications involving products of many multilinear polynomials, we develop a new algorithm
       that significantly reduces the number of field multiplications required for proving. Second, we develop a
       “small-value sum-check prover” algorithm. This significantly speeds up the prover in the common setting
       where the polynomials being summed evaluate to 64 or 32-bit integers, or to elements of a small sub-field
       within a larger extension field. Even outside of the small-value setting, this algorithm yields a faster
       “streaming prover”, by which we mean a small-space algorithm that applies whenever the terms being
       summed can be enumerated in small space (as arises, for example, in zkVM applications). Third, we
       nearly eliminate prover overhead in the ubiquitous case where one factor is an equality polynomial by
       exploiting its decomposable tensor structure.
           We implement these techniques in Jolt, a state-of-the-art zkVM, and evaluate their performance. In
       Jolt, we observe over an order of magnitude runtime speedup and memory reduction on the Spartan
       sub-protocol, and 1.7×–2.2× speedups for a key high-degree sum-check sub-protocol in the Shout batch-
       evaluation argument.


1      Introduction
The sum-check protocol [41] is a fundamental tool in the design of succinct proof systems. When run inter-
actively, it is an information-theoretically sound method for verifying claims of the form
                                                  X
                                                      g(x) = t,
                                                       x∈{0,1}ℓ

where g is a multivariate polynomial of individual degree d over a finite field F. From the verifier’s perspective,
the protocol reduces the expensive task of summing 2ℓ evaluations of g to the much cheaper task of evaluating
g at a single random point in Fℓ . In many applications g factors as a product of d multilinear polynomials;
this is the case we consider throughout.
    When used in succinct non-interactive arguments of knowledge (SNARKs), the sum-check protocol gener-
ally minimizes the amount of data the SNARK prover must commit to cryptographically, and also minimizes
the time required to prove that this committed data is well-formed. Because of these features, the sum-check
    ∗ This manuscript directly combines and improves upon results from prior work [8, 23].
    † Carnegie Mellon University
    ‡ New York University
    § Ingonyama
    ¶ a16z crypto research and Georgetown University




                                                                  1
protocol now underpins SNARKs for arithmetic circuit satisfiability [30, 63, 65], R1CS [49], Plonkish and
CCS [14, 52], the fastest lookup arguments [51, 53], polynomial commitment schemes [4, 25, 26, 45], folding
schemes [11, 37, 38, 12, 44], and zero-knowledge virtual machines (zkVMs) like Jolt [5], SP1 Hypercube [55],
and Ceno [40].
   The sum-check protocol is so effective at reducing cryptographic costs that its own proving time and
memory have become a major bottleneck in many proof systems.

Overhead of large-field arithmetic. The security of the sum-check protocol is directly related to the
size of the finite field F over which it operates. For non-interactive security, the sum-check protocol needs
to operate over fields of at least λ = 128 bits, with many systems (such as Jolt) requiring 256-bit fields to
support elliptic curve-based polynomial commitments. This leads to a large overhead: a single 256-bit field
multiplication requires 40-100 CPU cycles [66]. For additional details on the necessity of large fields, see
Appendix F.

Time-space tradeoffs for sum-check algorithms. Let M = 2ℓ be the size of the sum being proved.
The fastest proving algorithms for products of multilinear polynomials [61, 58] perform a number of field
operations that scales linearly with M ; however, these algorithms also require linear space (i.e., storing
Θ(M ) field elements). In practice, when M can be on the order of billions, the memory requirements of these
algorithms can be prohibitive.
    There are low-memory alternatives, called streaming algorithms, which use significantly less space at
the cost of superlinear time. The best streaming algorithm, recently introduced by Baweja et al. [10], uses
O(M 1/k ) space and O(M log log M ) time for any constant k whenever d is a small constant (i.e., 3 or
smaller). However, as d increases, this algorithm rapidly approaches the performance of a prior streaming
algorithm [21] that costs O(d2 M log M ) time and O(d + log M ) space. For realistic values of M , this is more
than an order of magnitude slower than the linear-time algorithm.
    To summarize, recall that we are considering applications of the sum-check protocol to a product of d
multilinear polynomials over a λ-bit field F. In a crude model where a field multiplication costs one unit
and linear space is allowed, the “linear-time” sum-check proving algorithm [61, 58] is essentially optimal for
small d like d = 2 or d = 3. In practice, however, field multiplications dominate proving time (and, even
asymptotically, a λ-bit field multiplication should not be regarded as a unit-cost operation). On top of this,
moving to a sublinear-space proving algorithm results in a time penalty.
    Moreover, handling high d is important in some modern proof systems. For example, the Shout [51]
batch-evaluation argument used in Jolt [5, 2], as currently configured, invokes a sum-check protocol with a
configurable degree d that can be up to 32. This makes efficient prover support for high-degree sum-checks
important in practice.
    A major goal and focus of our work is to speed up the Jolt zkVM prover [5, 2] as much as possible.
Jolt is a state-of-the-art zkVM that is simple and fast, relying entirely on various sum-check instances for
its information-theoretic core (the PIOP), together with a polynomial-commitment layer. When proving
programs with large trace lengths (say 1 billion cycles), the Jolt prover spends about 65 − 70% of its time
on sum-checks, making it a major bottleneck.
    While this is the main motivation, we also stress that our techniques apply to a broad range of applications
of the sum-check protocol in SNARK design, including the fastest SNARKs for circuit- and constraint-
satisfaction, such as Spartan [49, 1] and its variants like Binius64 [57] (which applies SuperSpartan, a SNARK
for Customizable Constraint Systems [52], over binary fields using (FRI-)Binius [25, 26] as the polynomial
commitment scheme).
    An earlier version of this manuscript appeared in prior work [7]. The present extended version reorganizes
and expands that presentation, and directly combines and improves upon results from prior work [8, 23].

1.1    Our results
This work presents a variety of prover-side optimizations for sum-check that, except for one (univariate skip
(Section 7)), leave the protocol, verifier, and soundness unchanged.1 The techniques we introduce are com-
  1 Univariate skip, first introduced by Gruen [33], modifies the protocol but still remains sound.




                                                               2
                             Algorithm                           Time               Space
                                                                  2
                             LinearTime [61, 58]                 d M                  dM
                             OptLinearTime                   (d log d)M               dM
                             LogSpace [21]                   d2 M log M            d+ log M
                                                         2
                             CrossProductk [10]          d M (k + log log M )       M 1/k
                             EvalProductStreamk      (d log d)M (k + log log M )    M 1/k

Table 1: Generic-setting prover asymptotic costs (M =2ℓ ), counted in terms of bb (i.e., big-big) field multi-
plications. In all cases, the constants hidden by the asymptotics are concretely small.


plementary to each other, and exploit structural properties common in sum-check applications, such as small
polynomial evaluations, long-running sums of products, high-degree products, and equality polynomials.

Faster field arithmetic via small-value specialization and delayed reduction. In Section 3, we
observe that while computing the product of two arbitrary finite field elements is expensive, when one or
both elements are small interpreted as integers (e.g., storable in a single 64-bit or 32-bit machine word),
it is possible to compute their product significantly faster. We then generalize these techniques to the
efficient computation of linear combinations (and, more generally, low multiplicative depth circuits) over
the appropriate finite field. Our techniques improve efficiency by allowing intermediate values to exceed the
field size, deferring modular reduction until the end of the operation sequence.2
     We provide explicit procedures for small-small, small-big, and big-big multiplications, where the latter
refers to standard finite field multiplication.

High-degree sum-check speedups. In Section 4, we apply this observation to the problem of efficiently
computing the product of d multilinear polynomials, each in v variables. This computation is a core subroutine
in all known sum-check proving algorithms and dominates their runtimes.
     The most concretely efficient prior baseline is the naive algorithm that performs O(dv+1 ) (big-big) mul-
tiplications to compute this product by directly evaluating the product at (d + 1)v points. We lower this cost
to O(dv + d log d) (big-big) multiplications with a concretely small constant. In the univariate case of v = 1,
this is an improvement from O(d2 ) to O(d log d) multiplications, while for v > 1, this is an improvement by
a factor of d over the naive algorithm.3 For large d used in practice, such as d = 16 or d = 32, this yields
substantial concrete speedups: up to about 2.5× in our high-degree kernel microbenchmarks, and about
1.7×–2.2× in Jolt’s read-access (RA) virtualization sum-check benchmark (see §9).
     This approach is inspired by a suggestion of Ben Diamond [24]; however, making the idea concretely
efficient requires a routine to efficiently extrapolate from a small set of evaluation points to a larger set. Our
contributions here consist of generalizing the approach to the multivariate setting and making it concretely
efficient, by optimizing the extrapolation step with a mix of specialized field operations and optimal multi-
addition chains.

Improved speed/memory tradeoffs. In Section 5, we work at the granularity of full sum-check prover
algorithms, combining the techniques above with additional algorithmic insights to improve prover perfor-
mance across the time-space tradeoff spectrum. Table 1 summarizes our results against prior work.
   Streaming algorithms typically group the rounds of the sum-check protocol into epochs called windows
and amortize the cost of computing the prover’s messages over all rounds within a window [21, 10]. When
using a window size of k rounds, our improvement over prior work [10] comes from working with (d + 1)k
evaluations, rather than O((2d )k ) terms used to compute the coefficients of intermediate polynomials. We
show that computing these evaluation points can be structured as a recursive polynomial multiplication
problem, similar to the high-degree optimization above, allowing speedups using techniques similar to the
Toom-Cook multiplication algorithm [18, 60].
  2 While the delayed reduction technique is not new and has been used in other contexts, our work is the first time it has

applied to speed up sum-check proving, yielding a substantial speedup for all existing sum-check algorithms ( Section 3).
  3 The lower-order (sb/addition) work is O(dv+1 ), which is dominated by the bb savings for all practical values of d.




                                                             3
Small-value sum-check optimizations. When the underlying multilinear polynomials in the sum-check
protocol have small evaluations (as is common in zkVMs), we further reduce the number of expensive big-big
multiplications in this algorithm. Here, we say informally that an ℓ-variate multilinear polynomial p has small
evaluations if, for all x ∈ {0, 1}ℓ , p(x) can be specified with significantly fewer bits than arbitrary elements
of F. This includes, for example, values in {0, 1, . . . , 264 − 1} when working over a 128- or 256-bit prime field,
or values in a 32- or 64-bit subfield of a larger extension field.
    The key insight is that the first few rounds of the sum-check prover make up the vast majority of
the prover’s work, and in these rounds only a handful of random field elements arise—all other values in
the prover’s computation within these rounds are small. By working with evaluation points, rather than
coefficients, it is possible to replace a significant fraction of big-big multiplications with much cheaper small-
small and small-big multiplications. The resulting prover time improvements are substantial for all d, even
d = 2, and even in non-streaming (i.e., linear-space) contexts.

Handling decomposable polynomials for free. In practice, some of the multilinear polynomials in the
sum-check protocol have a specific decomposable structure. That is they can be expressed as a product of
univariate polynomials. One common example is the equality polynomial
                                                 ℓ
                                                 Y
                                   eq(W,
                                   e     X) =        (Wi · Xi + (1 − Wi ) · (1 − Xi )),
                                                i=1

with randomly chosen W ∈ Fℓ , which is nearly ubiquitous in sum-check applications. In Section 6, we show
how to leverage this structure in the streaming setting, to nearly eliminate all overheads from this polynomial
factor.
    This decomposability allows for unique amortization strategies. This structure was previously exploited
by Gruen [33]; however, our techniques are distinct and complementary.4 The key insight involves rewriting
the sum-check messages as iterated sums, which allows the prover to compute small tables of values that can
be reused across rounds of the protocol.

Implementation and evaluation. We have implemented these techniques and integrated them into the
Jolt zkVM (§8). 5 Our experimental evaluation (§9) shows substantial microbenchmark speedups that carry
over to end-to-end prover performance. In Jolt’s Spartan outer benchmarks, our most optimized variant
(using univariate skip, which trades faster proving for a higher-degree verifier interpolation step) reaches
10.9× runtime speedup over an unoptimized baseline (with none of our optimizations in this paper), and
up to 17.5× lower isolated peak memory; at memory-bottleneck scales, runtime speedup grows up to 57.9×.
In Shout’s read-access virtualization sum-check, we observe 1.7×–2.2× speedups across various configurable
degree settings.

1.2     Related work
Sum-check’s central role in modern SNARKs has spurred extensive prover-side optimizations. We review
prior work, spanning general techniques and setting-specific variants.

Sum-check origins. The sum-check protocol was introduced by Lund, Fortnow, Karloff, and Nisan [41]
as a key component in an interactive proof for #P and later PSPACE [54]. The provers in these protocols
took superpolynomial time even when applied to very simple problems (e.g., those solvable in logarithmic
space). The sum-check protocol was later harnessed by Goldwasser, Kalai, and Rothblum (GKR) [30], who
used it to construct an interactive proof for any arithmetic circuit of polylogarithmic depth and polynomial
size, with a prover that runs in polynomial time.
  4 See also a small variation proposed by Setty and Thaler [51] that avoids altering the prover’s message in each round of

sum-check.
  5 See https://github.com/quangvdao/jolt/tree/zkproof-submission.




                                                             4
Linear time proving. The linear-space implementations of Vu et al. [61] and Thaler [58] are what is
colloquially called the “linear-time” sum-check prover when applied to a product of multilinear polynomials.
Cormode, Thaler, and Yi [21] gave a space-efficient variation that runs in quasilinear time using only loga-
rithmic space. The name “linear-time” stems from the fact that, for fixed d, the prover performs O(M ) field
operations, where M = 2ℓ is the size of the summation domain. We follow the conventional name “linear-
time”, though the dependence on d is crucial in practice and is a focus of our work, as is the difference
between big-by-big field multiplications compared to big-by-small or small-by-small.
     These algorithms have since been refined and deployed in a variety of systems. For example, they were used
in a long line of works to implement linear-time variants of the GKR protocol [20, 61, 58, 62, 63, 68, 65, 67].
They also form the prover backbone in Spartan [49], which is itself a major component of the Jolt zkVM
[5]. A line of works has also applied the sum-check protocol to obtain efficient memory-checking arguments,
meaning a way of forcing an untrusted prover to correctly process reads and writes to a large memory (or
just reads, in the case of read-only memories) [69, 50, 53]. Most recent in this line of work is Twist and Shout
[51].

Low-memory proving. Baweja et al. [10] implement the sum-check prover (applied to a product of
a constant number of multilinear polynomials) in sublinear space and slightly superlinear time (i.e., in
O(M · log log M ) field operations and using space M 1/k for any constant integer k > 1, where M = 2ℓ is the
size of the sum being computed). Assuming natural conjectures, Baweja et al. also prove a matching lower
bound of Ω(M log log M ) field multiplications for the sum-check prover applied to a product of two multilinear
polynomials when using sublinear space. This lower bound in terms of M also applies to our improvement
of their streaming algorithm; we improve upon the asymptotic dependence on the degree instead.

Delayed reduction. The idea of postponing modular reduction to a canonical field representation when
performing many operations sequentially (often referred to as “lazy reduction”) is a well-known optimization
in pairing-based cryptography [47, 3, 48], and is used in practice in many high-performance elliptic curve
and SNARK implementations (e.g., blst [56] and gnark-crypto [16]) to optimize extension field arithmetic
and multi-scalar multiplications. Our contribution is to systematically apply this insight to the core linear
combinations and low-degree polynomial evaluations of the sum-check protocol, where it combines with
small-value arithmetic to yield substantial speedups. We describe the delayed reduction principle and its
applications in detail in §3.

Gruen’s optimizations. A recent work of Gruen [33] also seeks to optimize the sum-check prover and
focuses on the case where the protocol is performed over fields of small characteristic. Two of the optimizations
in that work are relevant to us. The first is useful when summing a product of multilinear polynomials one of
which is decomposable. Gruen’s optimization in this setting is complementary to our own, and is discussed
in more detail in Section 6. The second is the univariate-skip technique itself, which targets the same small-
value regime as ours but modifies the protocol and increases the degree of the first-round prover polynomial;
we revisit this tradeoff in Section 7.
    Our small-value optimizations do not have any of the above limitations, instead applying “as is” to existing
sum-check-based SNARKs, yielding functionally equivalent implementations (i.e., the SNARK verifier is
unchanged).

Structured sum-check protocols. The sparse-dense sum-check prover algorithm [53] achieves a gen-
eral time-space tradeoff, running in O(cM ) time and O(M 1/c ) space for any integer c > 0, but applies
only to structured sum-check instances, involving the product of an arbitrary multilinear polynomial and
a structured multilinear polynomial. Its refinement, the prefix-suffix inner product algorithm [43], further
generalizes applicability and improves efficiency for these structured scenarios. Jolt employs these protocols
where possible for efficiency; however, their applicability is limited to specific structured sum-check instances
(they do not apply to many sum-check instances in Jolt, including those in Spartan).

Concurrent work. As mentioned above, after the release of an initial version of our results [8, 23], Nair,
Thaler, and Zhu [43] described an efficient small-space implementation of the Jolt prover (without invoking


                                                       5
SNARK composition or recursion), whose concrete efficiency benefits substantially from our optimizations.
    Two recent works also focus on the sum-check protocol applied in the small-characteristic setting. Liu
and Zhang [39] focus on the setting of binary tower fields, building on a technique of Dao and Thaler [22] to
give a sum-check prover algorithm for products of d Boolean-valued multilinear polynomials. However, for
the most common settings of d, namely d ∈ {2, 3}, their algorithm is asymptotically slower than ours, and
no implementation is provided. Wei et al. [64] obtain a fast sum-check prover implementation by combining
parallel repetition with NeutronNova’s [38] “sumfold” scheme that reduces many independent instances of
the sum-check protocol to a single one.


2     Preliminaries
Notation. We index vectors from 1, and denote ranges using bracket notation as: [a, b] := {a, . . . , b},
[n] := {1, . . . , n}, [< i] := {1, . . . , i − 1}, and [> i] := {i + 1, . . . , n} (where n is assumed to be clear from
context). Ud is shorthand for the set {∞, 0, 1, . . . d−1} and U     cd := Ud \{0} is the set {∞, 1, . . . d−1}. We write
            Pℓ            i−1
natb (x) := i=1 xi · b        to refer to the natural number in base b corresponding to the vector x ∈ [0, b − 1]ℓ ,
abbreviating nat(x) when b = 2.

2.1     Finite fields
SNARKs that use elliptic curve-based polynomial commitments need to operate over large prime fields Fp
of roughly 256 bits; examples include the scalar fields of the BN254, secp256k1, or BLS12-381 curves. On
64-bit architectures, elements of such fields are represented as N = 4 limbs of 64-bit unsigned integers. To
accelerate multiplication, field elements are typically stored in Montgomery form [42]. An element a ∈ Fp is
represented as a′ = aR (mod p), where R = 264N is a power of two, chosen so that multiplication or division
by R amounts to very cheap bit shifts.
    Multiplying two elements a′ , b′ in Montgomery form involves two steps. First, a large-integer multiplica-
tion computes c = a′ · b′ , a 2N -limb integer, at a cost of N 2 native multiplications. Second, a Montgomery
reduction computes cR−1 (mod p) to return the product to Montgomery form, costing an additional N 2 + N
native multiplications.6 The total cost for a field multiplication is thus approximately 2N 2 + N native mul-
tiplications and a similar amount of additions, translating to around 50-100 CPU cycles when N = 4 [66]
(see Appendix G for further details).
    Barrett reduction [9] is another common technique for modular reduction which does not perform the
division by R. An optimized implementation gives the same number of multiplications as Montgomery
reduction, but with a larger number of conditional subtractions, and thus is slower in practice. Because of
this, most field arithmetic libraries use Montgomery representation for large prime fields
    Hash-based SNARKs often use ∼ 128-bit extension fields Fpk , which are k-dimensional vector spaces
over a base field Fp . Extension field elements can be represented as vectors over the base field, relative to
a chosen basis. A standard monomial basis represents elements as polynomials of degree less than k, with
multiplication performed modulo a degree-k irreducible polynomial. When k = 2τ is a power of two, a tower
basis can be used, constructed from a sequence of iterated quadratic extensions. For both bases, multipli-
cation in the extension field costs O(k log2 3 ) ≈ O(k 1.585 ) multiplications in the base field via Karatsuba’s
algorithm [36]. Prominent examples include the degree-4 tower extension of the 31-bit BabyBear prime field
and the degree-128 tower extension GF(2128 ) of the binary field GF(2), used in systems like Binius [25].

2.2     Multilinear polynomials
We state some facts about multilinear polynomials needed in our paper. See standard references, e.g. [59],
for derivations.
   6 It is possible to reduce the multiplication count to N 2 + 1 [27], but this may not always yield a practical speedup due to

an increased number of conditional branches.




                                                               6
Multilinear extension. An ℓ-variate polynomial p is multilinear if it has degree at most 1 in each variable.
The multilinear extension of a function f : {0, 1}ℓ → F is the unique multilinear polynomial p such that
p(x) = f (x) for all x ∈ {0, 1}ℓ .
   In particular, the equality polynomial eq
                                          e defined as
                                                  ℓ
                                                  Y
                                    eq(X,
                                    e     Y)=           (Xi · Yi + (1 − Xi ) · (1 − Yi ))                         (1)
                                                  i=1

                                                                     ?
is the multilinear extension of the equality function (· = ·) : {0, 1}ℓ × {0, 1}ℓ → {0, 1}, as we can verify that
                                        (
                                           1 if x = y
                             eq(x,
                              e    y) =                  , for all x, y ∈ {0, 1}ℓ .
                                           0 otherwise

Lemma 1. Let p : Fℓ → F be a multilinear polynomial. Then for any 0 ≤ i ≤ ℓ, any (r1 , . . . , ri ) ∈ Fi , and
any x′ ∈ {0, 1}ℓ−i ,                               X
                        p(r1 , . . . , ri , x′ ) =   e 1 , . . . , ri ), y) · p(y, x′ ).
                                                     eq((r                                                  (2)
                                                      y∈{0,1}i

   Setting i = 1, Equation (2) simplifies to

                                     p(r1 , x′ ) = (1 − r1 ) · p(0, x′ ) + r1 · p(1, x′ ).                        (3)

Setting i = ℓ, we get the multilinear extension formula
                                                       X
                                 p(r1 , . . . , rℓ ) =   e 1 , . . . , rℓ , y) · p(y).
                                                         eq(r                                                     (4)
                                                        y∈{0,1}ℓ


Lagrange interpolation. A (univariate) polynomial s(X) of degree d is uniquely determined by its values
at d + 1 distinct evaluation points U = {x0 , . . . , xd } ⊂ F via the Lagrange interpolation formula:
                                    d
                                    X                                                       Y X − xj
                           s(X) =         s(xi ) · L U,i (X), where L U,i (X) =                               .   (5)
                                    i=0
                                                                                                   xi − x j
                                                                                            j̸=i

In our algorithms, we use a standard variant of Lagrange interpolation that takes into account the “evaluation
at infinity” of a polynomial, defined as s(∞) := the highest-degree coefficient of s(X).
Lemma 2. Let s(X) = a · X d + · · · ∈ F[X] be a polynomial of degree d. Then for any distinct evaluation
points x1 , . . . , xd ∈ F, setting U = {∞} ∪ {x1 , . . . , xd }, we have the identity:
                                               d
                                               Y                         d
                                                                         X
                                 s(X) = a ·          (X − xk ) +               s(xk ) · L{xi },k (X).             (6)
                                               k=1                       k=1

                                     Qd
Thus, we can define LU,0 (X) :=        k=1 (X − xk ) and LU,k (X) := L{xi },k (X) for k ∈ [d].


Streaming model. For all streaming algorithms, we assume that the evaluations p1 (x), . . . , pd (x) for
x ∈ {0, 1}ℓ can be enumerated in linear time and small space, in lexicographic order (either little- or big-
endian) from x = 0ℓ to x = 1ℓ . This holds in many applications, since p1 , . . . , pd are typically the multilinear
extensions of functions f1 , . . . , fd : {0, 1}ℓ → F, whose evaluations over the Boolean hypercube can themselves
be enumerated in linear time and small space (for example, when they are derived from the execution trace
of a virtual machine).




                                                                 7
Setup: Assume that the verifier has oracle access to the polynomial g, and knows the value C0 claimed to
equal                                        X
                                                   g(x) = C0 .
                                                        x∈{0,1}ℓ

For each round i = 1, . . . , ℓ:

1. P sends the univariate polynomial si (X) claimed to equal
                                   X
                                               g(r1 , . . . , ri−1 , X, xi+1 , . . . , xℓ ).
                                    (xi+1 ,...,xℓ )∈{0,1}ℓ−i


P does so by sending the evaluations {si (u) : u ∈ U
                                                   bd } to V.

2. V sends a random challenge ri ← F to P.
3. V derives si (0) := Ci−1 − si (1), then sets Ci := si (ri ).

After ℓ rounds, we reduce to the claim that

                                                        g(r1 , . . . , rℓ ) = Cℓ .

V checks this claim by making a single oracle query to g.

                                             Figure 1: The sum-check protocol


2.3     The sum-check protocol
In Figure 1, we describe the sum-check protocol that reduces checking a claim of the form
                                              X
                                                    g(x) = C,
                                                        x∈{0,1}ℓ

for a polynomial g of degree at most d in each variable over field F, to checking the evaluation of g at a
random point r ∈ Fℓ : g(r) = v. We assume that g is a product of d multilinear polynomials p1 , . . . , pd ; by
linearity, existing algorithms can be straightforwardly extended if g is any degree-d function of multilinears.
    In each round j, the honest prover sends a univariate polynomial sj of degree d. As any degree-d univariate
polynomial is specified by its evaluations on any set of d + 1 points, computing sj (c) for all c ∈ {∞} ∪
{0, 1, . . . , d − 1} suffices to uniquely specify sj .7 In fact, the prover can omit the evaluation sj (0), and instead
let the verifier derive it from the previous round using the equation sj (0) = Cj−1 − sj (1), which holds for
an honest protocol execution.
Theorem 3. The sum-check protocol applied to a polynomial g of individual degree at most d is perfectly
complete and has soundness error of dℓ/|F|.
    See, e.g., [59] for a proof of this standard result, attributed to Lund, Fortnow, Karloff, and Nisan [41].8

Linear-time algorithm for sum-check proving. We recall the linear-time algorithm from prior work [21,
61, 58], which runs in time linear in the instance size M = 2ℓ . The key idea is that we “bind” the polynomial
after each round to this round’s verifier challenge ri . After each round i, it uses the verifier’s challenge ri
to compute and cache the partial evaluations pk (r1 , . . . , ri , x′ ) for all k ∈ [d] and x′ ∈ {0, 1}ℓ−i . This cache,
   7 We assume a mapping from {0, 1, . . . , d − 1} to distinct field elements. For large enough prime fields, these integers are

naturally identified with their corresponding field elements. For binary extension fields, a natural choice is to use those whose
binary representation (in the chosen basis) matches that of each integer .
   8 Not only does the sum-check protocol have soundness error at most dℓ/|F|, it satisfies a stronger property: it has round-

by-round soundness at most d/|F| in each round. This ensures that the protocol remains secure (in the random oracle model)
even after it is rendered non-interactive via the Fiat-Shamir transformation. See [13] for details.


                                                                   8
which halves in size each round, allows for efficient computation of the next round’s polynomial in only
O(d2 · 2ℓ−i ) time. The total runtime is O(d2 · 2ℓ ). See Section C for a full description and cost analysis of
LinearTimeSC , along with full descriptions of two prior streaming algorithms [21, 10].


3     Non-black-box field arithmetic
The implementation of arithmetic operations in a finite field is typically treated as a black-box: given two field
elements, one can add, subtract, multiply, or divide them. These operations can broadly be decomposed into
two discrete steps. First, the field elements are treated as integers (or polynomials) and the corresponding
integer (or polynomial) operation is performed. This results in a non-reduced integer (or polynomial). Second,
the result is reduced to obtain a valid canonical representation of the resulting field element.
    By opening up this black box, we identify a variety of techniques that involve modifying, deferring, or
batching reductions across multiple operations. The first of these is a more efficient algorithm for multiplying
two field elements when one of them is “small” when interpreted as an integer (i.e., fits into a single machine
word). The second of these is a delayed (also known as deferred, or lazy) reduction technique, where we
minimize the number of (Barrett or Montgomery) reductions in a long-running sequence of field operations.
As mentioned in Section 1.2, we stress that this technique is not new, but to the best of our knowledge ours
is the first time this technique is systematically applied to sum-check.

3.1     Multiplying with small integers
As discussed in §2.1, multiplying two N -limb field elements in Montgomery form involves 2N 2 + N native
multiplications. However, when one of the operands is a small integer that fits into a single limb (e.g., a
64-bit integer), we can employ a more direct and efficient method. Instead of converting the small integer to
Montgomery form, we can:
    1. Multiply the multi-limb integer representation of the field element by the small integer directly. This
       large integer (bignum) multiplication costs only N native multiplications.
    2. Apply a single, optimized pass of Barrett reduction to the (N + 1)-limb result to perform the modular
       reduction. This costs an additional N + 1 native multiplications.
This optimized approach reduces the total cost from 2N 2 + N to 2N + 1 native multiplications, which in
practice is about a 2-3× speedup for a ∼ 256-bit field. We give details in Appendix B.1.
    To distinguish types of multiplications, we use the following notation. A multiplication of two (big) field
elements is denoted as a big-big multiplication (bb). A multiplication of a small field element (i.e., a machine
integer) with a big field element is denoted as a small-big multiplication (sb). Finally, a multiplication of two
small field elements (i.e., two machine integers) is denoted as a small-small multiplication (ss). When we
discuss the complexity of various algorithms, we will focus on the number of bb operations as the dominant
cost, while also accounting for sb and ss operations as secondary costs when relevant.

3.2     Small value arithmetic over tower fields
An analogue of small-value arithmetic is also available for tower fields. Recall from §2.1 that a tower field
F is constructed as a series of quadratic extensions over a base field B, denoted B ⊂ B(1) ⊂ · · · ⊂ B(ℓ) = F,
where each B(j) is a degree-2 extension of B(j−1) . This recursive structure allows for two benefits (already
exploited in prior work [25, 26]):

    1. Compressed subfield representation: An element x ∈ B(j) is, by construction, a linear combination
       of the first 2j basis vectors of F over B. Thus, it can be represented using only 2j elements from B.
                                                                                                         ′
    2. Fast subfield multiplication: To multiply an element x ∈ B(j) by an element y ∈ B(j ) (with
                                                                                                       ′
       j < j ′ ), we can leverage the recursive structure. We view y as y0 + y1 α, where y0 , y1 ∈ B(j −1) . The
       product x · y = (x · y0 ) + (x · y1 )α becomes two recursive multiplications of an element in B(j) by
                        ′                                                                                     ′
       elements in B(j −1) . This recursive definition leads to a multiplication algorithm that costs only 2j −j
       multiplications in the subfield B(j) .


                                                        9
These properties allow operations on subfield elements to be treated as a form of small-value arithmetic,
yielding significant performance gains. Further details are in Appendix B.

3.3    Delayed reduction
Instead of focusing on a single field multiplication, we turn to computing a linear combination of field
elements, specifically a dot product between a vector of small integers and a vector of large field elements.
An efficient primitive of this form is particularly useful when applied to the sum-check protocol, as described
in Sections 4 and 5.                                              Pk
    Formally, consider computing the linear combination S = i=1 ci · ai (mod p), where each ci is a 64-bit
unsigned integer and each ai is a large field element in Montgomery form.
    A black-box approach would involve k bb multiplications. Using our new sb multiplication primitive,
this can be improved to k sb multiplications. However, in the spirit of opening the black-box further, the
modular reduction in each of these sb multiplications can be deferred to the end as a single modular reduction
operation.
    The full procedure is the following. First, compute the integer product Ti = ci · ai wherePeach Ti is an
                                                                                                   k
integer of at most N + 1 limbs. Then, sum these integer products to get an integer total T = i=1 Ti . If the
                          Pk
coefficient sum satisfies i=1 ci < 264 , then T still has at most N + 1 limbs and the specialized single-pass
Barrett reduction from Appendix B applies directly. More generally, if the accumulated coefficient growth
needs one extra limb, then T has at most N + 2 limbs and one should either widen the final reduction routine
or reduce in batches. Finally, perform a single Barrett reduction on T to compute S = T mod p.
    This approach amortizes the cost of modular reduction, requiring only k small-big (integer) multiplications
(at N native multiplications each) plus one final reduction (at N + 1 native multiplications), for a total of
k · N + (N + 1) native multiplications. This is nearly a 2× improvement over an approach that uses raw sb
multiplications, and a far larger improvement over an approach which treats field multiplication as a black
box.
    This primitive can be further adapted to support cases where ci can be: (i) larger (say 128-bit unsigned
integers), or (ii) negative. The first case is handled straightforwardly by adapting the number of limbs used
in the intermediate integer representation. The second involves splitting the sum into positive and negative
terms, computing the positive and negative integer linear combinations, taking the difference of the result,
and finally performing a Barrett reduction.

Delayed reduction in field extensions. This technique of delaying reductions also applies to field
extensions with some modifications, though we do not specifically implement or benchmark this extension
in this work.
     In this setting, say one has an extension Fp [X]/(f (X)) for a degree-κ irreducible polynomial f . The
multiplication of two extension field elements begins with a multiplication of two degree-(κ − 1) polynomials
to produce a polynomial of degree at most 2κ − 2. This step typically involves κ2 base-field multiplications.
Then polynomial division by f is performed to produce an extension field element.
     There are two types of reductions happening here: (i) reductions on the base field elements themselves
(in the base field multiplications) and (ii) a final polynomial reduction (taking remainder when divided by
f ).
     It is possible to delay both types of reductions by working with a “long” representation. In this setting,
a linear combination will consist of up to 2κ − 1 coefficients, each one having bit-width more than twice the
bit-width of a base field element. If base field reduction is fast, one could apply the base field reduction right
away, delaying only the polynomial reduction. If not, it is possible to delay both types of reductions. We
leave the implementation and optimization of this technique to future work.

Application to sum-check.         Recall that in every round, the prover must evaluate expressions of the form

                                                   X        d
                                                            Y
                                     sj (u) =                      pi (r[<j] , u, x′ ),
                                                x′ ∈{0,1}ℓ−j i=1




                                                          10
which are long-running accumulations of products. For each summand, one can first compute h(x′ ) :=
Qd−1                  ′                                  ′                    ′
  i=1 pi (r[<j] , u, x ), then form the final product h(x ) · pd (r[<j] , u, x ) in an unreduced representation, and
defer reduction until after many summands have been accumulated (or at the end of the accumulator update).
This replaces many per-term reductions by one batched reduction per accumulator, and therefore reduces
prover cost without changing the protocol. The effect is most pronounced for low degrees, especially d ∈ {2, 3},
where this final multiplication accounts for a large fraction of per-summand work; we measure this effect
empirically in Section 9.

Rough cost model. In subsequent sections, we often refer to trading off one operation for a handful of
another operation, so it is useful to have a heuristic model of the relative costs of these operations for 256-bit
fields. Following the notation established earlier in this section, say ss operations have unit cost, then it
is helpful to think of bb additions, sb multiplications, bb multiplications, and sb linear combinations of n
variables as having costs of roughly 5, 8, 32, and 5n + 3 respectively. This model is crude, using simple
round numbers to provide intuition. Although the actual costs of these operations in practice are hardware-
dependent and field-dependent, this model can be justified empirically using the results in Section 9.


4     Handling high-degree polynomials
Almost all sum-check prover algorithms require, as a subroutine, the ability to compute the product of d
linear (or multilinear) polynomials, where d can be as large as 32 in practice. While adding two v-variate
degree-d polynomials can be performed with (d+1)v additions and no multiplications, computing the product
of d linear polynomials is typically much more expensive.
    This section provides a general algorithm for computing this product, which is concretely faster than all
prior approaches for the values of d and v arising in practical applications of the sum-check protocol. We
focus first on the univariate case for simplicity in exposition, and then show how to generalize from univariate
to multivariate.

4.1    Product of univariate polynomials
For the univariate
          Q        case, let p1 , . . . , pd be d linear polynomials. The most common approach to compute the
product i pi (x) is to directly evaluate this product at d + 1 points. Each linear   Q polynomial, pi , can be
extrapolated to evaluations at Ud using d − 1 additions. Given these evaluations, i pi (x) can be computed
for each x ∈ Ud using d − 1 bb multiplications. This results in a total of (d − 1) · (d + 1) bb multiplications
and d · (d − 1) additions. This algorithm is simple to implement, optimal for d = 2, and commonly used in
practice.
    Hyperplonk [14] describes an asymptotically more efficient divide-and-conquer approach. Split the list
of polynomials in half, make recursive calls to compute the product of the first ⌊d/2⌋ polynomials and the
product of the last ⌈d/2⌉ polynomials, and then multiply the two resulting polynomials. When using FFT-
based polynomial multiplication, this algorithm requires O(d log2 d) bb multiplications; however, in practice,
there are large constants hidden in the O-notation which make this algorithm significantly slower than the
naive approach for common values of d (also, not all finite fields support efficient FFTs). For this reason, we
consider the common approach to be the baseline for comparison.

An alternative algorithm. Here we introduce an alternative algorithm whose expensive bb work is
O(d log d). The lower-order (sb/addition) cost is O(d2 ), which is concretely acceptable since sb operations
and additions are significantly cheaper than bb multiplications. This is concretely more efficient for the values
of d used in practice. Additionally, we significantly optimize the concrete number of operations over a naive
specification of our new algorithm.
    Consider a recursive algorithm that takes in the evaluations of d linear polynomials at {0, 1} and outputs
the evaluations of their product at Ud . To compute this, it first divides the list of d polynomials in half
and recursively computes the product of each half. This yields two polynomials of degree ⌈d/2⌉ and ⌊d/2⌋,
specified by their evaluations over U⌈d/2⌉ and U⌊d/2⌋ respectively. Next, it extrapolates these polynomials



                                                        11
Procedure 1 MultiProductEvalv,d : Efficient product of multilinear polynomials in evaluation form using
extrapolation.
Input: d multilinear polynomials p1 , . . . , pd in v variables, specified by their evaluations over {0, 1}v
                                                Qd
Output: The product polynomial g(x) = i=1 pi (x), specified by its evaluations over Udv
 1: if d = 1 then
 2:     g(x) ← p1 (x)                        ▷ Identify the input two-point domain with U1 via a fixed bijection
 3:     return g
 4: else
 5:     m ← ⌊d/2⌋
 6:     qL ← MultiProductEvalv,m (p1 , . . . , pm )
 7:     qR ← MultiProductEvalv,d−m (pm+1 , . . . , pd )
         ′
 8:     qL ← MultiExtrapolatev,m,d (qL )
         ′
 9:     qR ← MultiExtrapolatev,d−m,d (qR )
              ′    ′
10:     g ← qL  ◦ qR                                                           ▷ Pointwise product of evaluations
11:     return g
12: end if



to their evaluations over Ud and then multiplies these evaluations point-wise to get the evaluations of their
product over Ud .
    A precise accounting of the number of bb multiplications gives the recurrence a(d) = a(⌊d/2⌋)+a(⌈d/2⌉)+
(d + 1) with base case a(1) = 0, whose closed form is

                                     a(d) = d⌈log2 d⌉ + 2d − 2⌈log2 d⌉ − 1.

In particular, a(d) ≤ d⌈log2 d⌉ + d − 1, with equality when d is a power of two. A naive realization of the
extrapolation step uses Θ(d2 ) sb multiplications and a similar number of additions. These additions and sb
multiplications can be optimized using the techniques in Section 3.3; moreover, nearly all the sb operations
can be eliminated entirely using a few more technical insights about Vandermonde matrices and optimal
multi-addition chains. See Appendix D for details.
   When this algorithm is applied as a subroutine in the linear-time sum-check prover LinearTimeSC , the
number of bb multiplications is reduced from Θ(d2 M ) to Θ((d log d)M ).
   Note that a slight refinement of this algorithm can be used here, as the evaluation point at 0 can be
omitted and a single bb multiplication can be saved. When this optimization is applied, this algorithm yields
a concrete improvement for all d ≥ 4. At d = 4, the number of bb multiplications is reduced from 12M to
10M . By d = 32, the number of bb multiplications is reduced from 992M to 190M , a > 5× improvement.

4.2    Product of multilinear polynomials
The univariate algorithm is a special case of a more general algorithm (Procedure 1) for computing the
product of d multivariate polynomials using a minimal number of bb multiplications, used later in Section 5.
The algorithm is given the multilinear polynomials
                                                 Qdp1 , . . . , pd by their evaluations on the Boolean hypercube
{0, 1}v , and needs to return their product g = k=1 pk also in evaluation form; namely, by returning the
evaluations of g on the extended grid Udv := {0, 1, . . . , d − 1, ∞}v .
    Whereas the univariate algorithm worked with evaluations over Ud , the multivariate algorithm works
with evaluations over Udv . This means that univariate extrapolations from Uk to Ud become multivariate
extrapolations from Ukv to Udv .
    Multivariate extrapolation reduces to repeated univariate extrapolation along each dimension, and is
described in Procedure 2. To begin, for each S ∈ Ukv−1 , the evaluations at Uk × S can be extrapolated
to evaluations at Ud × S using the univariate extrapolation algorithm. This process is repeated v times to
extrapolate along each dimension. In the j’th step, the evaluations at Udj−1 × Ukv−j+1 can be extrapolated
to evaluations at Udj × Ukv−j using repeated univariate extrapolation. In the j’th step, (d + 1)j−1 · (k + 1)v−j




                                                       12
Procedure 2 MultiExtrapolatev,k,d : Multivariate polynomial extrapolation from evaluations at Ukv to Udv
using a univariate extrapolation subroutine as a black-box.
Input: A v-variate polynomial p with per-variable degree at most k, specified as evaluations over Ukv
Output: q, the evaluations of p over Udv
    Initialize q with known evaluations over Ukv
 1: q ← p
 2: for j = 1 to v do
    For each slice orthogonal to dimension j
 3:     for each (xl , xr ) ∈ Udj−1 × Ukv−j do
    Apply univariate extrapolation on the jth axis
 4:         q(xl , Ud , xr ) ← Extrapolatek,d (q(xl , Uk , xr ))
 5:     end for
 6: end for
 7: return q



univariate extrapolations are required (one for each setting of the other coordinates), resulting in a total of
                                           v
                                           X
                                             (d + 1)j−1 (k + 1)v−j
                                            j=1

univariate extrapolations to extrapolate from Ukv to Udv .
   A general accounting of the number of bb multiplications in this multivariate algorithm gives the recur-
rence a(d) = a(⌊d/2⌋) + a(⌈d/2⌉) + (d + 1)v with base case a(1) = 0. Using the extrapolation analysis from
Appendix D, we obtain the following summary.
Lemma 4. For v = 1, the algorithm MultiProductEval1,d requires O(d log d) bb multiplications and O(d2 ) sb
multiplications plus additions. For every fixed v ≥ 2, MultiProductEvalv,d requires O(dv ) bb multiplications
and O(dv+1 ) sb multiplications plus additions.
   The bb cost is d log d for v = 1 and Θ(dv ) for v ≥ 2. The lower-order (sb/addition) cost is Θ(dv+1 )
uniformly, because each univariate extrapolation from degree k to 2k costs Θ(k 2 ) operations, and the resulting
per-level sums form a convergent geometric series dominated by the root.
   Using the optimizations to extrapolation described in Appendix D, the ratio of bb operations for the
naive algorithm to this algorithm for various values of d and v is summarized in Table 2. In the sum-check
protocol, it is possible to save a small part of a single univariate extrapolation and a single bb multiplication
by omitting an evaluation at 0, though for large d and v this offers only a marginal improvement.


5     Small-value and streaming proving
Small-value operations and fast multilinear products set the stage for an optimized round-batching algorithm
that allows the prover to compute messages for a contiguous window of rounds in a single pass. This technique
leads to two simultaneous improvements:
                                         (i) an efficient prover in the small-value setting, whose speedup over
LinearTimeSC scales as Θ (d2 κ)1/δ for fixed d, where κ is the cost ratio between bb and ss multiplications
and δ = log2 (d + 1); and (ii) a streaming prover, improving the dependence on d from Θ(d2 ) to Θ(d log d)
over the prior algorithm of Baweja et al. [10].

5.1    Small-value setting
We first motivate the idea of round-batching in the context of small-value proving, then show how it gener-
alizes to the streaming setting.




                                                       13
                                      v
                                                1              2                3                   4                 5
                             d
                                  3             87
                                                ⁄            32 25
                                                               ⁄              128 91
                                                                                   ⁄             512 337
                                                                                                     ⁄            2048 1267
                                                                                                                      ⁄
                                  4           15 11
                                                ⁄            75 43
                                                               ⁄             375 179
                                                                                 ⁄              1875 787 ⁄        9375 3611
                                                                                                                      ⁄
                                  5           24⁄16         144 70 ⁄         864⁄334            5184 1714
                                                                                                     ⁄           31104 9286
                                                                                                                          ⁄
                                  6           35⁄21         245 99 ⁄         1715⁄525          12005 3075
                                                                                                    ⁄            84035 19341
                                                                                                                      ⁄
                                  7           48⁄26         384 132
                                                               ⁄             3072⁄782          24576⁄5220       196608 37646
                                                                                                                          ⁄
                                  8           63⁄31         567 167
                                                               ⁄            5103⁄1087          45927⁄8135       413343 66271
                                                                                                                          ⁄
                                  9           80⁄37        800⁄213          8000⁄1513         80000⁄12501       800000 112897
                                                                                                                      ⁄
                                 10           99⁄43        1089⁄261         11979⁄1999        131769⁄18069            *
                                 16           255 79
                                                 ⁄         4335 623⁄        73695 7087
                                                                                 ⁄                  *                 *
                                 32          1023 191
                                                 ⁄        33759 2335
                                                                   ⁄            *                   *                 *

Table 2: Ratio of the number of bb multiplications between a baseline multilinear polynomial product al-
gorithm and our optimized algorithm (Algorithm 1), for various numbers of variables v and polynomials d.
These operations dominate the cost of the algorithm, so they can be treated as a proxy for overall speedup.
∗ indicates entries where either the numerator or denominator exceeds 106 (the display cutoff used to keep
the table readable). Our algorithm is significantly faster for all parameters listed and this speedup increases
sharply as one moves down or right in the table.


Taking advantage of small evaluations.                                 Consider the linear-time algorithm LinearTimeSC in the small-
value setting applied to the polynomial
                                                                              d
                                                                              Y
                                                     g(X1 , . . . , Xℓ ) =             pk (X1 , . . . , Xℓ ).
                                                                              k=1

In the first round, it is possible to perform ss and sb multiplications, as, by definition, the evaluations of g
required for computing the first prover message are all small. However, from the second round onwards, the
prover exclusively performs bb multiplications, since the bound evaluations pk (r1 , . . . , ri−1 , x′ ) are no longer
small, due to the presence of the large random challenges r1 , . . . , ri−1 ← F.
    In each round, the number of evaluations required to compute the sum is halved, so this approach makes
the most expensive round far cheaper. Extending this benefit to the first few rounds, by computing the first
few messages with only ss and sb multiplications, would significantly reduce prover work.
    The presence of the random values r1 , . . . , ri−1 eliminates the possibility of exclusively using ss and sb
multiplications; however, the effect of their contributions can be delayed.
    We consider a prover which delays binding the variables X1 . . . , Xi−1 to the values r1 , . . . , ri−1 , opting
to treat them symbolically instead. This approach has a clear tradeoff: it eliminates a large number of bb
multiplications, but it also increases the number of ss multiplications and additions required. If the prover
takes this approach and wants to bind the polynomial only after the first v rounds, then it first needs to
compute the v-variate polynomial that suffices to answer the first v rounds:

                                                                          X            d
                                                                                       Y
                                          q(X1 , . . . , Xv ) :=                            pk (X1 , . . . , Xv , x′ ),
                                                                       x′ ∈{0,1}ℓ−v k=1


purely from the evaluations of p1 , . . . , pd on {0, 1}v . For all x′ , computing the product in the summand is
exactly the multilinear product evaluation problem, which we have an efficient algorithm for in Procedure 1.9
    Moreover, when the evaluations of p1 , . . . , pd over the Boolean hypercube {0, 1}ℓ are small (and d is not
significantly larger than what is seen in practice), most bb and sb multiplications in MultiProductEval can
    9 To be precise, it is possible to skip one out of (d + 1)v evaluations of q, for instance the evaluation at the all-zero point. This

is a simple generalization of the trick in the v = 1 case, described in Section 2.3. The impact of this quickly becomes negligible
as v grows.



                                                                              14
be replaced with ss multiplications.10 This is because extrapolations of small values remain small, and the
growth rate of the products of these extended evaluations is similarly controlled. For typical values of d
and v, in this setting, this primitive requires Θ(dv ) ss multiplications and not a single bb multiplication.
More generally, the small-value specialization is valid whenever the chosen window satisfies the bit-width
preconditions of the underlying arithmetic routines: extrapolated values must remain within the machine-
word budget used by the ss/sb kernels, and every delayed-reduction accumulator must stay within the limb
bounds discussed in Sections B and 3.3.
   Given this modified cost structure, the prover can tune v, the number of initial rounds to batch together
before binding, to balance the savings from avoiding bb multiplications against the increased number of ss
multiplications and additions.

Comparison with an earlier version of the paper. In prior work [7], we described essentially the same
small-value proving algorithm (called Algorithm 4 and Algorithm 6 in that paper). In this version, we opt for
an alternative explanation that we think clarifies the underlying algebra: the pre-computation is specifically
to form evaluations of the v-variate prefix polynomial q(X1 , . . . , Xv ) over the full grid Udv . This algebraic
framing abstracts away the complex, round-by-round “accumulator” state machines and Toom-Cook index
mappings (e.g., the idx4 function) used in that prior work [7]. Instead, we show that evaluating q on this
grid yields exactly the information needed to answer the verifier dynamically during the first v rounds via
simple challenge-weighted combinations.

5.2      Streaming setting
In the linear time small-value setting we focused strictly on reducing runtime; however, the streaming setting
imposes a space budget of O(M 1/k ) for a tunable k ≥ 2. As it turns out, an extension of the round-batching
idea is also well-suited to this setting when applied repeatedly, rather than just once.
    Recall, as the sum-check progresses, the number of summands decreases by a factor of 2 each round. The
LinearTimeSC algorithm uses standard caching techniques to exploit this halving; however, these techniques
require far more space than is available to the prover in the streaming setting.
    Instead of caching, our prover algorithm takes advantage of iterative batching of rounds. If the prover
batches rounds [j, j + ω − 1] together, then this incurs a normalized overhead of ≈ (d + 1)ω /2j+ω relative to
the linear-time baseline. The exponential decrease of the overhead in j means that this overhead becomes
more tolerable as the protocol progresses and fewer variables remain, allowing us to start with small windows
and gradually increase them as total work decreases.
    Mechanically, the high-level design of our prover algorithm is similar to that of Baweja et al. [10] as they
both consist broadly of three phases:
   1. A time-constrained precomputation phase with geometrically growing window sizes.

   2. A space-constrained precomputation phase with a fixed integer window chosen to meet the O(M 1/k )
      memory target.
   3. A final phase identical to LinearTimeSC once the remaining variable count is small enough.
However, at a low level, the implementation of each phase, as well as the points at which the prover transitions
between phases differ significantly. Appendix C contains additional details, particularly on the schedule for
phases.

Algorithm and cost summary. Figure 2 describes the complete algorithm with the option to specialize
to the small-value or streaming setting (or both). The window schedule Ω determines the behavior: for
streaming, Ω uses the progressive integer schedule from Figure 2 (with floor/clip operations and a final-
phase cutoff at ℓ − ST +1 ≤ ℓ/k), rather than the single early window used in the small-value setting.
  10 For exceptionally large d, it may also be better to use the evaluation points at 0, 1, . . . , d rather than 0, 1, . . . , d − 1, ∞ as

this results in a smaller largest entry of the extrapolation matrix.




                                                                    15
                                                             
                                               EvalProduct SV Streamk, SC

                                                             ℓ           ℓ
     P Streams of evaluations for p1 , . . . , pd over {0, 1} . Let M = 2 , δ = log2 (d + 1), α = δ/(δ − 1). Let
Inputs:
St := i<t ωi be the partial window sum (with S1 := 0).
Window schedule Ω = (ω1 , . . . , ωT ):

• SV: Ω = (ω1 ), single early window to minimize time, then linear-time for remaining rounds.
• Streamk : Two precomputation phases with integer windows, then a final linear-time phase:
                             (
                                                                      t ≤ T ′,
                                                               
                               min max 1, αt−1 /(δ − 1) , ℓ − St
                        ωt =
                               min(max(1, ⌊ℓ/(kδ)⌋) , ℓ − St )        t > T ′.

Here T ′ is the largest index in the time-constrained phase, i.e., the last t for which αt−1 /(δ − 1) ≤ ⌊ℓ/(kδ)⌋.
                                                                                                    

Choose T so that ℓ − ST +1 ≤ ℓ/k.

Interpret r[1:0] as the empty tuple.

1. For t = 1, . . . , T :
(a) For each x′ ∈ {0, 1}ℓ−St −ωt , compute using MultiProductEval :
                                                              d
                                                              Y
                                                                    pk r[1:St ] , X1 , . . . , Xωt , x′ ,
                                                                                                       
                                 Px′ (X1 , . . . , Xωt ) :=
                                                              k=1
                                    P
and thus qt (X1 , . . . , Xωt ) =    x′ Px (X1 , . . . , Xωt ).
                                           ′


If t > 1, emulate streaming access to pk (r[1:St ] , ·) via on-the-fly Lagrange weights eq(r
                                                                                        e [1:St ] , ·).
(b) Emulate rounds [St +1, St +ωt ] directly on the evaluation grid of qt (grid-based linear-time emulation;
see Appendix C).
2. Final phase: for remaining rounds i > ST +1 , stream and store

                                 pk (r[1:ST +1 ] , x′ ) : k ∈ [d], x′ ∈ {0, 1}ℓ−ST +1 ,
                               

                                             d
then run LinearTimeSC on pk (r[1:ST +1 ] , X) k=1 .


Figure 2: Combined small-value and streaming prover, parameterized by an integer window schedule Ω =
(ω1 , . . . , ωT ) and a final linear-time phase.


   In the small-value setting, with the cost analysis in Section C.4.1, we get the following result. Let κ
denote the ratio of costs between bb and ss multiplications.11
Lemma 5. For fixed degree parameter d, at the optimal early-window size v ∗ = logd+1 (d2 κ) (clipped/rounded
to valid rounds), EvalProductSVSC has big-multiplication-equivalent runtime
                                                              
                                         Θ M · d2−2/δ · κ−1/δ ,

and space usage                                              
                                                            ∗
                                                  Θ (d + 1)v = Θ d2 κ ,
                                                                     

  11 For large prime fields with Montgomery multiplication, κ ≈ 2N 2 + N , where N is the number of limbs, so κ = Θ(N 2 ); for

tower extension fields with Karatsuba, κ ≈ N log2 (3) , where N is the extension degree.


                                                                  16
where δ = log2 (d + 1). Compared with LinearTimeSC (runtime Θ(d2 M )), this gives speedup Θ((d2 κ)1/δ ).
    For the streaming setting, we have the following result.
Lemma 6. For products of d multilinear polynomials, the evaluation-basis round-batched prover algorithm
EvalProductStreamk,SC uses O(M 1/k ) space and runs in time
                                                                   
                                      Θ (d log d)M (k + log log M ) .

    This improves over the prior work of Baweja et al. [10] which has complexity

                                            Θ(d2 M (k + log log M )).

Hidden in these asymptotics are small constants which we also improve on for parameters seen in practice.
Roughly speaking, their algorithm computes the coefficients rather than the evaluations of the product
polynomials, which is more expensive. A full analysis is provided in Section C.4.2.
    The improvement stems from a better growth base α = δ/(δ − 1) compared to αold = d/(d − 1) that
reduces the number of time-constrained passes, and more efficient evaluation-form storage that increases the
allowable space-constrained window size from ℓ/(dk) to ℓ/(kδ) with δ = log2 (d + 1). However, each pass still
requires Θ(d · M ) work for prefix adaptation to handle intermediate challenges.


6     Decomposable multilinear polynomial optimization
Many applications of the sum-check protocol involve a polynomial which has as one of its factors, a multilinear
polynomial which is decomposable into a product of univariate linear polynomials. The canonical example,
and most common one, is the equality polynomial eq(w,
                                                   e      X) in X with randomly chosen constant w. Many
applications of sum-check involve an equality polynomial term when batching multiple constraints into a
single protocol instance. For example, the Spartan protocol [49] verifies R1CS satisfiability by checking that
                                X
                                     eq(w,
                                      e    X) · (Az(X)
                                                 f      · Bz(X)
                                                          f      − Cz(X))
                                                                   f        = 0,                            (7)
                              X∈{0,1}ℓ


where eq
       e is the equality polynomial and Az,f Bz,
                                               f Czf are multilinear extensions derived from the product of
constraint matrices A, B, C and a witness vector z. For clarity, in the remainder of this section, we focus on the
equality polynomial, but our techniques apply more generally to any decomposable multilinear polynomial.
    Suppose it was possible to remove this polynomial entirely from the prover’s algorithm. Then, using our
multiproduct evaluation from Section 4, the prover’s dominant cost per window of size v would be Θ(dv ) bb
field multiplications instead of Θ((d+1)v ). Even for small values of d and v, the savings would be substantial:
for d = 3 and v = 4, this represents a > 2.3× decrease in the number of bb multiplications. While it may
not be possible to remove this factor entirely, it is possible to remove it from the multiproduct evaluation
step, nearly achieving the same savings.

Exploiting decomposability. The equality polynomial’s decomposable structure allows much more ef-
ficient handling. Observe that, for a variable X, eq(w,
                                                   e     X) decomposes as a product of linear factors as
            Qℓ
eq(w,
 e                e i , Xi ). Consider the window of rounds [i, i + v − 1]. This decomposability allows the
       X) = i=1 eq(w
equality polynomial to be written as the product of three parts.
    • The first part is a constant factor α = eq(w
                                              e [<i] , r[<i] ) contributed by past rounds.
                                                                              Qv
    • The second part is a product of linear factors in the current window: j=1 eq(w e i+j−1 , Xj ).

    • The third part is the weights contributed by future rounds: eq(w
                                                                  e [>i+v−1] , x′ ) for x′ ∈ {0, 1}ℓ−i−v+1 .

Splitting the polynomial in this way immediately leads to the following more efficient prover algorithm.




                                                       17
Algorithm overview.           Suppose, concretely, that the sum-check polynomial is of the form
                                                                                d
                                                                                Y
                                           g(X1 , . . . , Xℓ ) = eq(w,
                                                                 e     X) ·           pi (X),
                                                                                i=1

where p1 , . . . , pd are multilinear polynomials. For the window of rounds [i, i + v − 1], the prover is tasked
with computing the v-variate polynomial
                                          X
                                                  g(r1 , . . . , ri−1 , X1 , . . . , Xv , x′ ).
                                     x′ ∈{0,1}ℓ−i−v+1

By the decomposition into past rounds, the current window, and the remaining suffix, this can be rewritten
as
                           i−1
                           Y                 v
                                             Y
                                e j , rj ) ·
                               eq(w            e i+j−1 , Xj ) · T (X1 , . . . , Xv ),
                                               eq(w
                                 j=1                j=1

where T (X1 , . . . , Xv ) is defined as

                                  X                           d
                                                              Y
                                                          ′
                                        eq(w
                                        e [>i+v−1] , x )            pk (r[<i] , X1 , . . . , Xv , x′ ).
                                   x′                         k=1

While the first two parts are straightforward to compute, the challenge is to efficiently compute the third part
T . We give a sketch of the technique here for evaluating T on the grid Udv efficiently. Figure 8 summarizes
the main-body algorithm; full details and proofs are provided in Section C.5.
                                    e [>i+v−1] , x′ ) into a product of k polynomials and computes a table
     First, the prover partitions eq(w
of evaluations for each part using k-way decomposition, requiring only O(M 1/k ) space while maintaining
O(2ℓ−i−v+1 ) time complexity. Next, the prover iterates over all x′ ∈ {0, 1}ℓ−i−v+1 in lexicographic order,
and uses these evaluations in combination with multiproduct
                                                       Qv         evaluation from Section 4 to compute T on
Udv . Finally, this T can be easily combined with α · j=1 eq(w
                                                             e i+j−1 , Xj ) to form the sum-check polynomials
for rounds i through i + v − 1.

Lemma 7. Appending an equality polynomial factor eq(w,
                                                   e   X) to a product of d multilinear polynomials leads
to the following additional sum-check prover work:
    • Time: O(2ℓ−i−v+1 ) field operations for suffix weights, while preserving the same dominant multiproduct
      term as the non-equality case.

    • Space: O(M 1/k ) with k-way decomposition.
When combined with small-value proving, the optimization preserves the use of cheap small-value arithmetic,
requiring only small-by-big multiplications for the linear factors.
    The detailed proof and constants appear in Appendix C.5, Theorem 14. We note that in practice, a two-
way decomposition of eq(w,
                        e     X) often yields the best performance tradeoff; this variant is the one described
in the original note of the first and last author [23].


7     Univariate Skip over Large Prime Fields
Univariate skip, introduced by Gruen [33], is a generic way to reduce prover work by “fusing” several
Boolean variables into a single higher-degree variable, in a setting where we start out with base field values
but sumcheck is over the extension field. In this section, we show that univariate skip can also apply in the
setting of small values inside a large prime field, which allows us to apply the technique to applications such
as Spartan-in-Jolt.




                                                                18
General idea. Let f : Fn → F be the polynomial being summed. Univariate skip chooses a set of m
components to pack into one variable Y (here m is a design parameter, not necessarily a power of two), and
an interpolation domain D = {u0 , . . . , um−1 } ⊂ F of the same size. Let {Lj (Y )}m−1
                                                                                    j=0 be the Lagrange basis
for D. Define the packed polynomial
                                                              m−1
                                                              X
                                            fpack (Y, ·) :=         Lj (Y ) · fj (·),
                                                              j=0

where f0 , . . . , fm−1 are the objects being packed (for example, slices indexed by Boolean prefixes, or batched
constraint components in zerocheck). By construction, fpack (uj , ·) = fj (·) for all j. Operationally, this re-
places several rounds/components by one higher-degree univariate step.
    The familiar Boolean-block version is the special case m = 2k , with fj (·) = f (bin(j), ·) for a k-bit prefix.
But in batched zerocheck settings, one often wants m to match the number of packed constraints or terms;
this can be any convenient size.

What Gruen uses. Gruen’s zerocheck setting is over a small base field with a large extension field [33].
The univariate-skip instantiation there chooses domains compatible with that base/extension-field structure,
specifically a m-sized subgroup of the base field’s multiplicative group, to enable O(m log m) extrapolation
cost over the base field.

Adapting to large-prime fields. For our setting (small values inside a large prime field), we use the
same packing principle but with a different domain choice. Instead of a multiplicative subgroup, we take a
small symmetric integer domain around 0 with the required cardinality m:
                          Dm := {−⌊m/2⌋, −⌊m/2⌋ + 1, . . . , −⌊m/2⌋ + m − 1} ⊂ F.
This choice has two practical benefits. First, the interpolation points stay numerically small, which con-
trols the growth of intermediate Lagrange terms (compared with one-sided domains like {0, . . . , m − 1}).
Second, symmetry around 0 improves conditioning of integer-lifted intermediate expressions used in our
implementation, reducing delayed-reduction pressure.

Why quadratic interpolation is acceptable. With this domain, we use the straightforward O(|Dm |2 )
interpolation/evaluation routine. This is practical because |Dm | = m is chosen to be small in our target
regime and the arithmetic in the interpolation loop is dominated by multiplying large field elements by small
coefficients. Hence, the fast small-by-big multiplications (§3.3) and delayed reductions (§3) apply directly.
As a result, even a quadratic-in-m interpolation step has low concrete cost.

Practical bound on packed width.            For symmetric domains, the shifted Lagrange coefficients are integers
                                                                      
                                                           s   s−i−1
                                      αi (s) = (−1)m−1−i                   ,
                                                           i  m−1−i
where s is the integer shift from the left endpoint of the base window. Define
                                                                      m−1
                                                                      X
                                             Λ :=       max                 |αi (s)|.
                                                    s∈target shifts
                                                                      i=0
                                                                          P
If the packed values satisfy |vi | ≤ B, then the interpolation sum obeys | i αi (s)vi | ≤ BΛ. Hence, with a
one-extra-limb budget (signed 128-bit accumulation for 64-bit inputs), we need BΛ < 2127 .
    For the common odd symmetric case D = {−K, . . . , K} (so m = 2K + 1), a natural degree-2 target
window is {−2K, . . . , 2K}, which corresponds to shifts s ∈ [0, 3K] from the left endpoint of D. In this
specific regime, exact integer evaluation of αi (s) gives:
            Λ14 ≈ 7.16 · 1018 (≈ 262.6 ),     Λ15 ≈ 1.87 · 1020 (≈ 267.3 ),             Λ16 ≈ 4.88 · 1021 (≈ 272.0 ).
So under worst-case full-width 64-bit values in this degree-2 symmetric setting, K ≤ 14 is the conservative
safe choice. For higher packed degrees, the target window is larger and the corresponding value of Λ must
be recomputed.


                                                              19
Applicability. Univariate skip is most useful when the prover can choose a block of variables to pack
and then reuse this structure across many evaluations. As in Gruen’s analysis [33], the parameter k gives a
prover-verifier tradeoff: larger k decreases prover-side repeated work but increases the degree of the packed
univariate and therefore the verifier-side interpolation burden. In the more general m-ary formulation above,
the same tradeoff is controlled directly by m: larger m gives more prover amortization but increases univariate
degree and interpolation cost.


8     Implementation
For field arithmetic, we extended the arkworks [17] library to support the delayed reduction technique
in Section 3.
    Our Jolt integration includes several key components. First, we apply delayed reduction (Section 3)
across sum-check-heavy components. Second, we implement various iterations of the Spartan outer sum-
check prover. This spans from a baseline variant with no optimizations to successive variants incorporating
split-eq (Section 6) and delayed reduction (Section 3), followed by round-batching (Section 5.1) and univariate
skip (Section 7). We also include streaming variants of both our approach (Section 5) and that of Baweja
et al. [10]. Finally, we apply our high-degree optimization to the instruction RA virtualization sum-check
prover. In this context, the effective degree is configurable in the range {4, 8, 16, 32} and involves an equality
polynomial term optimized using our split-eq technique (Section 6).


9     Evaluation
Our evaluation aims to answer the following questions:
    1. How do our new white-box finite field techniques compare to black-box alternatives?
    2. How do our techniques improve the prover time and space of various sum-check primitives over prior
       work?

    3. What is the end-to-end impact of our techniques on real-world systems?

Experimental setup. All experiments are run over the BN254 scalar field (the field currently used in Jolt).
We run benchmarks on a MacBook Pro with Apple M4 Max (12 performance cores, 64 GB RAM). We use the
Criterion [34] benchmark tool to derive statistically significant microbenchmarks and Chrome-trace [31] span
analysis for RA virtualization measurements in Jolt. All microbenchmarks are run single threaded, and the
multithreaded benchmarks are specified as such. For memory, we use three complementary metrics: isolated
process peak RSS (Resident Set Size), which measures the maximum amount of physical RAM a process
consumes over its lifetime, for Spartan outer runs, setup-normalized ∆peak RSS for streaming comparisons
(∆peak RSS = peak RSS − RSS immediately after trace/setup), and allocative object-level heap snapshots
for retained-state accounting. This allows us to measure the additional memory overhead of components
when compared to the rest of Jolt.

9.1     The cost of finite field operations
We first benchmark primitive finite-field operations, including ss, sb, and bb multiplication costs and their
internal breakdowns.
    Next, we benchmark linear combinations with small coefficients using: (i) naive bb multiplication, (ii) sb
multiplication, and (iii) delayed reduction across the whole combination.
    Finally, we benchmark the product of d multilinear polynomials in v variables (the core high-degree kernel
from Section 4). Table 5 reports speedups of our optimized method over the naive baseline. Speedups grow
with d and v, reaching about 2.5× at (d, v) = (32, 18) and (32, 20).




                                                       20
                                     Operation                    Time (ns)
                                     ss multiply                      0.36
                                     bb add                           1.99
                                     sb multiply                      4.65
                                         Bigint multiply by u64              2.02
                                         Barrett reduce                      3.67
                                     bb multiply                  10.50
                                         Bigint multiply                     4.48
                                         Montgomery reduce                   6.67

Table 3: Microbenchmarks for various field operations. For sb and bb multiplications, we break down the
time into its constituent parts: raw big-integer multiplication and modular reduction and benchmark each
of these separately. Note that the sum of the time for the constituent parts exceeds the time for the full
operation because the compiler is able to optimize the combined operation better than the individual parts.

                          Size (n)               2       4        8             16      32
                          Baseline (ns)    55.10     107.27   212.85     438.95      873.31
                          sb (ns)          11.49     23.070    42.57      81.71      167.60
                          Fast (ns)         5.26       9.32    12.08      26.00       36.84
                          Speedup (×)     10.48      11.51    17.62      16.88       23.71

Table 4: Microbenchmark results of linear combinations of n variables with small-value coefficients. Baseline
indicates the approach of decomposing the linear combination into a series of bb additions and multiplications.
sb indicates the approach of using our new sb ops. Fast indicates delaying the reduction step across all sb
operations until the end of the linear combination. The speedup row indicates the difference in time between
the baseline approach and our one-reduction approach.


9.2    Delayed reduction in degree-2 sum-check
To isolate the effect of delayed reduction inside actual sum-check prover loops (see Section
                                                                                          P      3), we run two
single-threaded sum-check proverP  microbenchmarks:     one on  a clean degree-2 instance   x p(x)  · q(x), and a
degree-2 plus eq-poly instance x eq(τ,
                                    e    x) · p(x) · q(x) with split-eq optimization (see Section 6).
    Table 6 shows that delayed reduction yields a stable ≈ 1.37× speedup across variable sizes 14–26 in the
clean degree-2 setting. In the eq-poly setting (Table 7), the gain is smaller but still consistent at ≈ 1.09×.
This reduction in speedup is expected: after split-eq, fewer multiplications are on the critical path where
reductions can be deferred.

9.3    Jolt integration benchmarks
We evaluate two integrations in Jolt:
   1. Spartan outer sum-check (small-value + equality-polynomial optimizations);

   2. Shout instruction lookup RA virtualization (high-degree optimization).
   See Section E for full details on these sum-checks as they appear in Jolt. For Spartan ablations, we report
SHA2-chain-N , where N is the number of SHA-256 iterations. In Jolt’s SHA2 benchmark, one iteration
corresponds to roughly 3.4 × 103 RISC-V cycles, so the workload has approximately 3.4 × 103 · N cycles (e.g.,
N = 8192 is about 2.8 × 107 cycles). For end-to-end results, we use a scale parameter: scale s means the
trace is padded to roughly 2s cycles (for example, at scale 22 the unpadded trace is about 3.8M cycles and
the padded trace is about 4.2M cycles in our setup).




                                                        21
                   Speedup (baseline / optimized) v = 12 v = 14 v = 16            v = 18    v = 20
                   d=2                                  1.12×   1.87×    2.07×     2.20×     2.92×
                   d=4                                  1.17×   1.54×    2.04×     1.93×     2.07×
                   d=8                                  1.27×   1.58×    1.83×     1.94×     2.01×
                   d = 16                               1.33×   1.67×    1.91×     2.02×     2.04×
                   d = 32                               1.48×   1.93×    2.31×     2.48×     2.47×
                   Optimized runtime (µs)
                   d=2                                     88      121    246        709   2,235
                   d=4                                    145      238    606      1,882   7,038
                   d=8                                    351      641 1,640       5,329 21,262
                   d = 16                                 949    1,903 5,648      19,214 76,196
                   d = 32                               3,054    6,026 17,120     58,397 237,080
                   Baseline runtime (µs)
                   d=2                                     98    226    509   1,561   6,521
                   d=4                                    170    367 1,235    3,628 14,568
                   d=8                                    446 1,012 2,997 10,324 42,677
                   d = 16                               1,263 3,179 10,786 38,747 155,200
                   d = 32                               4,511 11,651 39,618 144,980 585,530

Table 5: High-degree product benchmark for computing the product of d multilinear polynomials in v vari-
ables. Values are Criterion mean estimates from a dedicated microbenchmark.

                              Variables    Baseline (ms)    Unreduced (ms)     Speedup
                                  14                1.15                0.87      1.31×
                                  16                5.42                3.98      1.36×
                                  18                21.0                15.2      1.38×
                                  20                82.6                59.4      1.39×
                                  22               331.5               235.2      1.41×
                                  24               1,324                 965      1.37×
                                  26               5,316               3,819      1.39×
                                                                                 P
Table 6: Degree-2 sum-check prover microbenchmark applied to the sum:              x p(x) · q(x), comparing baseline
multiplication against delayed reduction.


Spartan ablation (linear-space). Figure 3 shows a cumulative ablation12 over variants of the outer sum-
check protocol in Spartan (hereafter referred to as “Spartan outer”): baseline, split-eq, delayed reduction,
round batching, and univariate skip. The variants are defined as follows.
   • Baseline: textbook Spartan outer prover implemented with the linear-time sum-check algorithm,
     without the optimizations introduced in this paper.
   • Split-eq: applies equality-polynomial factorization (Section 6).

   • Delayed reduction: adds delayed reduction (Section 3).
   • Round batching: adds our multi-round small-value precomputation strategy (Section 5.1) to reduce
     big-field multiplications in early rounds.
   • Univariate skip: adds univariate skip (Section 7) replacing round batching, yielding our fastest linear-
     space Spartan outer variant (and is the current default in Jolt).
  12 By ablation, we mean starting from a baseline and adding one optimization at a time to isolate each optimization’s

contribution.



                                                           22
                                             Variables   Baseline (ms)       Unreduced (ms)                    Speedup
                                                14                   2.63                           2.49         1.06×
                                                16                   9.51                           8.57         1.11×
                                                18                   35.0                           32.2         1.09×
                                                20                  136.4                          124.3         1.10×
                                                22                  538.9                          494.9         1.09×
                                                                                                           P
Table 7: Degree-2 plus eq-poly sum-check prover microbenchmark.                                              x eq(τ,
                                                                                                               e     x) · p(x) · q(x) with split-eq,
comparing baseline multiplication against delayed reduction.

                                         (a) Runtime                                                                (b) Peak Memory

                              baseline
                105           split-eq
                            delayed red.




                                                                                  Peak RSS (GB)
                            round batch.
                104        univariate skip                                                        101
    Time (ms)




                103

                102                                                                               100

                101

                      23       25      27     29     211      213                                       27           29         211        213
                                    SHA-2 iterations                                                                SHA-2 iterations

Figure 3: Performance of Spartan’s outer sum-check (linear-space) in Jolt. (a) Runtime in milliseconds (log-
log scale); (b) Peak process RSS in GB (log-log scale). Our optimized variants (round batching and univariate
skip) maintain near-linear scaling in both time and memory, while baselines hit severe memory pressure at
large scales.


We see a monotonic improvement in performance as we add more optimizations. The largest incremental
gain comes from round batching, while univariate skip yields the fastest overall linear-space variant. This
ablation focuses on prover-side runtime and memory; univariate skip changes the prover/verifier tradeoff and
is discussed separately in Section 7. In a steady-state compute regime (N = 128—2048, about 4.4 × 105 —
7.0 × 106 RV64 cycles), the multiplicative gains across successive variants are as follows.
   • baseline → split-eq: 1.26—1.47×.
   • split-eq → delayed reduction: 1.09—1.31×.
   • delayed reduction → round batching: 4.10—6.01×.

   • round batching → univariate skip: 1.11—1.24×.
These values capture pure algorithmic throughput before dense variants hit severe memory pressure.
   In a memory-bottleneck regime (N ≥ 4096, about 1.4×107 RV64 cycles and above), dense variants become
memory-bound: the incremental performance gains are:

   • baseline → split-eq: 1.76—3.01×,
   • split-eq → delayed reduction: 1.02—1.12×,
   • delayed reduction → round batching: 8.81—14.95×,
   • round batching → univariate skip: 1.23—1.26×.



                                                                            23
This is consistent with the runtime scaling under input doubling: the proving times for baseline/split-
eq/delayed grow super-linearly (e.g., doubling the input from 2048 → 4096 iterations yields runtime slow-
downs of 3.85 × /2.86 × /2.84× respectively; 4096 → 8192: 5.32 × /3.11 × /3.43×), while round batching
and univariate skip proving times remain near-linear (about 1.94×–2.02× per doubling). Consequently, the
cumulative headline at 8192 iterations is much larger: univariate skip is 57.9× faster than baseline (about
2.1s vs. 121s), and round batching is 45.9× faster. This is consistent with the memory data in Table 9: at 512
iterations, dense variants already use 8.8–13.1 GB peak RSS, versus 0.75–1.29 GB for univariate skip/round
batching; by 8192 iterations, dense variants rise to 46.6–50.1 GB while univariate skip/round batching stay
at 11.5–15.0 GB. Tables 8 and 9 provide the full datapoints used in these plots, including both runtime and
isolated peak memory during sum-check.

     SHA2 iterations        8    16    32      64     128      256     512    1024    2048     4096   8192
     Baseline          32.1 53.2 95.3 168.4 306.9 625.6 1262.0 2679.7 5929.3 22814.6 121432.5
     Split EqPoly      25.9 35.4 61.9 107.1 208.4 483.5 925.1 2129.2 4538.9 12980.0 40305.6
     Delayed reduction 20.7 32.4 58.6 98.9 186.0 369.6 815.3 1954.4 4068.1 11552.3 39566.8
     Round batching     7.1 12.7 17.7 26.5 45.4 86.8 171.7 330.6 677.0 1311.3          2645.9
     Univariate skip    6.6 11.2 16.3 25.5 40.1 78.1 151.4 273.6 545.7 1064.1          2098.7

  Table 8: Numeric runtime data in milliseconds for the linear-space Spartan outer ablation in Figure 3.


                   SHA2 iterations       128        256     512      1024    2048    4096    8192
                   Baseline          3.280 6.552 13.094 14.387 28.202 28.005 50.054
                   Split-eq          2.207 4.405 8.802 12.386 24.762 46.102 46.610
                   Delayed reduction 2.207 4.406 8.799 12.386 24.761 46.155 46.998
                   Round batching    0.329 0.649 1.286 2.389 4.763 9.518 15.014
                   Univariate skip   0.195 0.380 0.749 1.386 2.760 5.761 11.511

Table 9: Peak process resident set size, measured in GB, when running Spartan’s outer sum-check in isolation
for proving various numbers of SHA2 executions.


Streaming
√             regime (low-space). Tables 10 and 11 compare linear-space univariate skip against two
   N -space streaming variants: our evaluation-basis streaming prover and a cross-product streaming baseline
(implemented in coefficient form, following Baweja et al.). Our evaluation-basis streaming implementation
is consistently faster than cross-product streaming. Relative to linear-space univariate skip, evaluation-basis
streaming is typically in the 1.62×–2.70× slowdown range overall (and 2.3×–2.7× on larger instances),
versus 1.88×–2.97× overall (and 2.6×–3.0× on larger instances) for cross-product streaming. Using setup-
normalized peak RSS (Table 11), where we subtract RSS immediately after trace/setup to mask shared
allocations, both streaming variants require much less additional memory at moderate and large sizes. At
the very smallest instances this normalized metric is close to the allocator/setup noise floor, so we interpret
it only qualitatively there. At 8192 iterations, the masked ∆peak RSS is 8.593 GB for univariate skip versus
0.018 GB (17.7 MB, evaluation-basis) and 0.036 GB (35.8 MB, cross-product), i.e., about       √ two orders of
magnitude lower for streaming. This MB-scale overhead is consistent with the intended N working set
once dense trace/setup allocations are removed.

RA virtualization in Shout. Table 12 reports scale s = 22 (i.e., padded to ≈ 222 cycles) trace mea-
surements for RA virtualization with the number of virtual polynomials set to N ∈ {8, 4, 2, 1} (degrees
5, 9, 17, 33), comparing optimized and baseline kernels. Total RA time improves by 1.70—2.18×, and the RA
share of total proving time is substantially reduced across all configurations.

End-to-end sweep. Table 13 reports a consolidated SHA2-chain sweep for scale parameters s = 22 to 25
(3 runs per scale) under the default optimized configuration. Proving time grows from 9.76 ± 0.12s (scale 22)


                                                          24
 SHA2 iterations                    8     16     32     64     128     256     512    1024     2048    4096    8192
 linear-space, univariate skip     6.6   11.2   16.3   25.5    40.1    78.1   151.4   273.6 545.7 1064.1 2098.7
 streaming, evaluation-basis      10.7   18.8   32.1   59.4    96.4   181.2   381.9   718.3 1261.9 2871.0 5647.1
 streaming, cross-product         13.9   21.1   39.1   62.5   103.8   213.8   418.8   784.7 1411.4 3165.7 6121.9
 evaluation-basis slowdown       1.62× 1.68× 1.97× 2.33× 2.40× 2.32× 2.52× 2.63×              2.31×   2.70×   2.69×
 cross-product slowdown          2.10× 1.88× 2.40× 2.45× 2.59× 2.74× 2.77× 2.87×              2.59×   2.97×   2.92×

Table 10: Streaming versus linear-space Spartan outer sum-check in Jolt. All runtimes are in milliseconds
(ms). √
      The evaluation-basis streaming variant is consistently faster than the cross-product baseline at the
same N -space regime.

 SHA2 iterations                     8     16     32     64     128     256     512    1024    2048    4096   8192
 univariate skip            0.105 0.100 0.095 0.082 0.136 0.272 0.539 1.078 2.152 4.300 8.593
 evaluation-basis streaming 0.105 0.101 0.094 0.082 0.057 0.011 0.015 0.013 0.015 0.017 0.018
 cross-product streaming    0.105 0.101 0.095 0.082 0.057 0.016 0.020 0.021 0.028 0.032 0.036

Table 11: Masked memory using setup-normalized peak RSS for streaming versus linear-space Spartan outer
variants across SHA2-chain 8–8192. We report ∆peak RSS = (run peak RSS) - (RSS immediately after
trace/setup) obtained from a dedicated memory microbenchmark, in GBs, which removes shared allocations
such as trace storage.


to 51.09 ± 1.11s (scale 25), while the RA virtualization share increases from 8.0% to 11.8% and the Spartan
outer sum-check share remains a smaller component (3.0% to 4.2%).

Memory measurements. We report memory using the metric that best matches each question. For
variant-level outer sum-check comparison, we use isolated process peak RSS obtained from a dedicated
memory microbenchmark. For streaming versus linear-space comparison, we report setup-normalized ∆peak
RSS to remove shared trace/setup allocations. For retained-state accounting, we use allocative object-level
heap snapshots. Under this methodology, isolated allocative object-level runs at 16k and 32k SHA2 iterations
show a stable ≈ 4.00× reduction for streaming versus linear-space univariate skip. For linear-space variant
ablations at SHA2-chain 128–8192 (Table 9), peak RSS in isolated runs drops from 3.28–50.05 GB (baseline)
to 0.19–11.51 GB for univariate skip (≈ 4.35×–17.5× lower) and to 0.33–15.01 GB for round batching
(≈ 2.94×–10.2× lower), with round batching using about 1.30×–1.73× higher peak RSS than univariate
skip. For end-to-end process peak memory (monitor/perfetto, single run per scale), we measure 4.98 GB
(scale 22), 9.91 GB (scale 23), 14.12 GB (scale 24), and 27.67 GB (scale 25).


10     Discussion
The techniques in this paper represent substantial progress toward practical SNARK-based proof systems,
especially in the setting of zero-knowledge virtual machines. We develop a suite of prover-side optimizations
for the sum-check protocol that significantly reduce proving time and memory usage. All of the optimizations
except univariate skip leave the protocol and verifier costs unchanged; univariate skip instead trades a faster
prover for a higher-degree verifier interpolation step.
     A primary beneficiary of these techniques is Jolt, which already had state-of-the-art proving performance
among zkVMs. Our improvements further strengthen its position, yielding even faster and more memory-
efficient proving.
     More broadly, these results help close the performance gap traditionally associated with operating over
large prime fields. Our techniques substantially mitigate the cost of these large fields, allowing systems like
Jolt to enjoy the benefits of elliptic curves without incurring prohibitive overhead from the 256-bit fields
that they impose. At the same time, our techniques remain applicable to future versions of Jolt and other
zkVMs that avoid elliptic curves and hence use 128-bit fields.



                                                       25
          Degree    Baseline (ms)      Optimized (ms)       Speedup        % prove (base)   % prove (opt)
             5          1,602                   921            1.74×           13.0%               8.4%
             9          2,135                  1,247           1.71×           17.5%              11.2%
            17          3,837                  2,254           1.70×           26.0%              17.1%
            33          6,501                  2,979           2.18×           39.7%              22.8%

Table 12: RA virtualization benchmark inside Jolt’s Shout lookup argument (scale parameter s = 22, multi-
threaded).

                     Scale   Prove time (s)      RA virtualization share    Spartan outer share
                       22        9.76 ± 0.12              8.0%                     3.0%
                       23       15.72 ± 0.18              9.6%                     3.4%
                       24       29.79 ± 0.38             10.2%                     3.6%
                       25       51.09 ± 1.11             11.8%                     4.2%

Table 13: End-to-end SHA2-chain proving sweep in Jolt (default optimized configuration, BN254, 3 runs
per scale, mean ± standard deviation). Component shares are extracted from Chrome-trace spans. These
include optimized implementations of both the RA virtualization and Spartan outer sum-check instances.


    The goal of this line of work is to put SNARKs on the same footing as digital signatures and en-
cryption—namely, as standard cryptographic building blocks that developers reach for without hesitation,
confident in their performance and reliability. In our view, SNARKs should be as pervasive in digital in-
frastructure as signatures and encryption already are. This work moves the field closer to realizing that
vision.


Acknowledgments
The first author thanks Riad Wahby for fruitful discussion, especially on the delayed reduction technique.


Disclosures
Justin Thaler is a Research Partner at a16z crypto and is an investor in various blockchain-based platforms,
as well as in the crypto ecosystem more broadly (for general a16z disclosures, see https://www.a16z.com
/disclosures/).


AI Usage
GPT, Claude, and Gemini were used to assist with implementation, benchmark setup, data extraction, LATEX
formatting, and parts of the writing in the technical sections. The authors have carefully reviewed every word
and every experimental result, and take full responsibility for all writing and results reported in this paper.


References
 [1] Spartan: High-speed zkSNARKs without trusted setup. https://github.com/Microsoft/Spartan
     (2020)

 [2] Jolt codebase. https://github.com/a16z/jolt (2025)
 [3] Aranha, D.F., Karabina, K., Longa, P., Gebotys, C.H., López, J.: Faster software for sparse isogenies
     and pairings. Cryptology ePrint Archive (2011)



                                                          26
 [4] Arnon, G., Chiesa, A., Fenzi, G., Yogev, E.: WHIR: Reed–solomon proximity testing with super-fast
     verification. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2024/1586 (2024), https://eprint.iacr.org/2024/1
     586
 [5] Arun, A., Setty, S., Thaler, J.: Jolt: Snarks for virtual machines via lookups. In: Annual International
     Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques. pp. 3–33. Springer (2024)

 [6] Attema, T., Fehr, S., Klooß, M.: Fiat-shamir transformation of multi-round interactive proofs. In: Theory
     of Cryptography Conference. pp. 113–142. Springer (2022)
 [7] Bagad, S., Dao, Q., Domb, Y., Thaler, J.: Speeding up sum-check proving. Cryptology ePrint Archive,
     Paper 2025/1117 (2025), https://eprint.iacr.org/2025/1117

 [8] Bagad, S., Domb, Y., Thaler, J.: The sum-check protocol over fields of small characteristic. Cryptology
     ePrint Archive, Paper 2024/1046 (2024), https://eprint.iacr.org/2024/1046
 [9] Barrett, P.: Implementing the rivest shamir and adleman public key encryption algorithm on a standard
     digital signal processor. In: Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptographic Techniques.
     pp. 311–323. Springer (1986)

[10] Baweja, A., Chiesa, A., Fedele, E., Fenzi, G., Mishra, P., Mopuri, T., Zitek-Estrada, A.: Time-space
     trade-offs for sumcheck. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2025/1473 (2025), https://eprint.iacr.
     org/2025/1473
[11] Boneh, D., Chen, B.: LatticeFold: A lattice-based folding scheme and its applications to succinct proof
     systems. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2024/257 (2024), https://eprint.iacr.org/2024/257
[12] Boneh, D., Chen, B.: Latticefold+: Faster, simpler, shorter lattice-based folding for succinct proof sys-
     tems. Cryptology ePrint Archive (2025)
[13] Canetti, R., Chen, Y., Holmgren, J., Lombardi, A., Rothblum, G.N., Rothblum, R.D.: Fiat-shamir from
     simpler assumptions. Cryptology ePrint Archive (2018)

[14] Chen, B., Bünz, B., Boneh, D., Zhang, Z.: HyperPlonk: Plonk with linear-time prover and high-degree
     custom gates (2023)
[15] Cloutier, F.: MULX — Unsigned Multiply Without Affecting Flags (nd), url: https://www.felixclo
     utier.com/x86/mulx

[16] Consensys: gnark-crypto: High-performance cryptographic and elliptic curve library in go. https://gi
     thub.com/Consensys/gnark-crypto (2024)
[17] arkworks contributors: arkworks zksnark ecosystem. https://arkworks.rs (2022)
[18] Cook, S.A.: On the minimum computation time of functions. In: Proceedings of the first annual ACM
     symposium on Theory of computing. pp. 187–192. ACM (1969)
[19] Cordes, P., et al.: What is the difference between the adc and adcx instructions on x86? https:
     //stackoverflow.com/questions/29747508/what-is-the-difference-between-the-adc-and-a
     dcx-instructions-on-x86 (2015)
[20] Cormode, G., Mitzenmacher, M., Thaler, J.: Practical verified computation with streaming interactive
     proofs. In: ITCS (2012)
[21] Cormode, G., Thaler, J., Yi, K.: Verifying computations with streaming interactive proofs. Proc. VLDB
     Endow. 5(1), 25–36 (2011). https://doi.org/10.14778/2047485.2047488, http://www.vldb.org/pvldb
     /vol5/p025_grahamcormode_vldb2012.pdf

[22] Dao, Q., Thaler, J.: Constraint-packing and the sum-check protocol over binary tower fields. Cryptology
     ePrint Archive, Paper 2024/1038 (2024), https://eprint.iacr.org/2024/1038


                                                     27
[23] Dao, Q., Thaler, J.: More optimizations to sum-check proving. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper
     2024/1210 (2024), https://eprint.iacr.org/2024/1210
[24] Diamond, B.: Sumchecks of medium degree. https://hackmd.io/@benediamond/Sye_bB1wJl (2025),
     accessed 2026-03-24

[25] Diamond, B.E., Posen, J.: Succinct arguments over towers of binary fields. Cryptology ePrint Archive,
     Paper 2023/1784 (2023), https://eprint.iacr.org/2023/1784, https://eprint.iacr.org/2023/1
     784
[26] Diamond, B.E., Posen, J.: Polylogarithmic proofs for multilinears over binary towers. Cryptology ePrint
     Archive, Paper 2024/504 (2024), https://eprint.iacr.org/2024/504, https://eprint.iacr.org/
     2024/504
[27] Domb, Y.: The Barrett-Montgomery duality and a new multi-precision modular reduction scheme with
     only n2 − 1 operations. https://medium.com/@ingonyama/the-barrett-montgomery-duality-and
     -a-new-multi-precision-modular-reduction-scheme-with-only-n2-1-b40ede4792da (2024),
     accessed: 2025-04-09

[28] Fiat, A., Shamir, A.: How to prove yourself: Practical solutions to identification and signature problems.
     pp. 186–194 (1986)
[29] Fog, A.: Instruction Tables: Lists of instruction latencies, throughputs and micro-operation breakdowns
     for Intel, AMD and VIA CPUs. Technical University of Denmark (2025), https://www.agner.org/op
     timize/instruction_tables.pdf

[30] Goldwasser, S., Kalai, Y.T., Rothblum, G.N.: Delegating computation: interactive proofs for muggles.
     Journal of the ACM (JACM) 62(4), 1–64 (2015)
[31] Google: Trace event format. https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CvAClvFfyA5R-PhYUmn5OOQt
     YMH4h6I0nSsKchNAySU/preview (2024)

[32] Gouvêa, C.P., López, J.: Implementing gcm on armv8. In: Topics in Cryptology—CT-RSA 2015: The
     Cryptographer’s Track at the RSA Conference 2015, San Francisco, CA, USA, April 20-24, 2015. Pro-
     ceedings. pp. 167–180. Springer (2015)
[33] Gruen, A.: Some improvements for the piop for zerocheck. Cryptology ePrint Archive (2024)

[34] Heisler, B.: Criterion.rs: Statistics-driven micro-benchmarking in rust. https://github.com/criteri
     on-rs/criterion.rs (2024)
[35] Intel Corporation: New instructions supporting large integer arithmetic on intel® architecture proces-
     sors. Technical whitepaper (PDF) (2013), https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/intel/intel
     -ipsec-mb/doc/ia-large-integer-arithmetic-paper.pdf

[36] Karatsuba, A.A.: The complexity of computations. Proceedings of the Steklov Institute of Mathematics-
     Interperiodica Translation 211, 169–183 (1995)
[37] Kothapalli, A., Setty, S.: Hypernova: Recursive arguments for customizable constraint systems. In:
     Annual International Cryptology Conference. pp. 345–379. Springer (2024)

[38] Kothapalli, A., Setty, S.: NeutronNova: Folding everything that reduces to zero-check. Cryptology ePrint
     Archive, Paper 2024/1606 (2024), https://eprint.iacr.org/2024/1606
[39] Liu, T., Zhang, Y.: Efficient SNARKs for boolean circuits via sumcheck over tower fields. Cryptology
     ePrint Archive, Paper 2025/594 (2025), https://eprint.iacr.org/2025/594
[40] Liu, T., Zhang, Z., Zhang, Y., Hu, W., Zhang, Y.: Ceno: Non-uniform, segment and parallel zero-
     knowledge virtual machine. Journal of Cryptology 38(2), 17 (2025)



                                                      28
[41] Lund, C., Fortnow, L., Karloff, H., Nisan, N.: Algebraic methods for interactive proof systems. In: FOCS
     (Oct 1990)
[42] Montgomery, P.L.: Modular multiplication without trial division. Mathematics of Computation 44(170),
     519–521 (1985). https://doi.org/10.2307/2007970, https://doi.org/10.2307/2007970
[43] Nair, V., Thaler, J., Zhu, M.: Proving CPU executions in small space. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper
     2025/611 (2025), https://eprint.iacr.org/2025/611
[44] Nguyen, W., Setty, S.: Neo: Lattice-based folding scheme for ccs over small fields and pay-per-bit
     commitments. Cryptology ePrint Archive (2025)
[45] Novakovic, A., Angeris, G.: Ligerito: A small and concretely fast polynomial commitment scheme (2025)
[46] Schorn, E.: Optimizing pairing-based cryptography: Montgomery multiplication in assembly. https:
     //www.nccgroup.com/research-blog/optimizing-pairing-based-cryptography-montgomery-m
     ultiplication-in-assembly/ (2021)
[47] Scott, M.: Implementing cryptographic pairings. In: Pairing-Based Cryptography–Pairing 2007: First
     International Conference, Tokyo, Japan, July 2-4, 2007. Proceedings 1. pp. 177–196. Springer (2007)
[48] Scott, M.: Slothful reduction. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2017/437 (2017), https://eprint.i
     acr.org/2017/437
[49] Setty, S.: Spartan: Efficient and general-purpose zksnarks without trusted setup. In: Annual Interna-
     tional Cryptology Conference. pp. 704–737. Springer (2020)
[50] Setty, S., Angel, S., Gupta, T., Lee, J.: Proving the correct execution of concurrent services in zero-
     knowledge (Oct 2018)
[51] Setty, S., Thaler, J.: Twist and shout: Faster memory checking arguments via one-hot addressing and
     increments. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2025/105 (2025), https://eprint.iacr.org/2025/105
[52] Setty, S., Thaler, J., Wahby, R.: Customizable constraint systems for succinct arguments. Cryptology
     ePrint Archive, Paper 2023/552 (2023), https://eprint.iacr.org/2023/552
[53] Setty, S., Thaler, J., Wahby, R.: Unlocking the lookup singularity with lasso. In: Annual International
     Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques. pp. 180–209. Springer (2024)
[54] Shamir, A.: Ip= pspace. Journal of the ACM (JACM) 39(4), 869–877 (1992)
[55] Succinct: Sp1 hypercube: Proving ethereum in real-time. https://blog.succinct.xyz/sp1-hypercu
     be/ (2025)
[56] Supranational: blst: Multilingual rsa-and ecdsa-capable bls12-381 signature library. https://github.c
     om/supranational/blst (2024)
[57] team, T.I.: Binius: Rust implementation of Snark over towers of binary fields (2023), https://gitlab
     .com/IrreducibleOSS/binius
[58] Thaler, J.: Time-optimal interactive proofs for circuit evaluation. In: CRYPTO (2013)
[59] Thaler, J.: Proofs, arguments, and zero-knowledge. Foundations and Trends in Privacy and Security
     4(2–4), 117–660 (2022)
[60] Toom, A.: The complexity of a scheme of functional elements realizing the multiplication of integers.
     In: Soviet Mathematics Doklady, No 3. pp. 714–716 (1963)
[61] Vu, V., Setty, S., Blumberg, A.J., Walfish, M.: A hybrid architecture for verifiable computation (2013)
[62] Wahby, R.S., Ji, Y., Blumberg, A.J., Shelat, A., Thaler, J., Walfish, M., Wies, T.: Full accounting for
     verifiable outsourcing (2017)


                                                     29
[63] Wahby, R.S., Tzialla, I., Shelat, A., Thaler, J., Walfish, M.: Doubly-efficient zkSNARKs without trusted
     setup (2018)
[64] Wei, Y., Wang, K., Xiang, B., Zhang, X., Wang, H., Deng, Y., Zhu, X., Lin, L.: Packed sumcheck
     over fields of small characteristic with application to verifiable FHE. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper
     2025/719 (2025), https://eprint.iacr.org/2025/719

[65] Xie, T., Zhang, J., Zhang, Y., Papamanthou, C., Song, D.: Libra: Succinct zero-knowledge proofs with
     optimal prover computation (2019)
[66] XopMC: secp256k1-x64-avx: very fast (not secure) implementation of arithmetic on curve secp256k1 on
     x86 64. https://github.com/XopMC/secp256k1-x64-avx, rEADME benchmark: Montgomery mul =
     49 cycles/op on Intel Core i7-6700 (Skylake); 93 cycles/op on Intel Core i3-2328M (Sandy Bridge)

[67] Zhang, J., Xie, T., Zhang, Y., Song, D.: Transparent polynomial delegation and its applications to zero
     knowledge proof. In: 2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). pp. 859–876. IEEE (2020)
[68] Zhang, Y., Genkin, D., Katz, J., Papadopoulos, D., Papamanthou, C.: vSQL: Verifying arbitrary SQL
     queries over dynamic outsourced databases (2017)

[69] Zhang, Y., Genkin, D., Katz, J., Papadopoulos, D., Papamanthou, C.: vRAM: Faster verifiable RAM
     with program-independent preprocessing (2018)


A     Auxiliary procedures
In this section, we list the procedures that are called by the algorithms in the paper.

A.1     Equality polynomial evaluations
Procedure 3 computes the equality polynomial evaluations eq(w,
                                                           e     x) for w ∈ Fℓ and x ∈ {0, 1}ℓ using 2ℓ bb
multiplications. Procedure 4 is a memoized version of Procedure 3 that additionally stores the intermediate
result {e(w[1:i] , x)}ℓi=1 at each step i.

Procedure 3 Compute eq(w,
                    e     x) for all x ∈ {0, 1}ℓ
Input: w ∈ Fℓ
Output: v such that v[nat(x)] = eq(w,
                                    e     x) for all x ∈ {0, 1}ℓ
                                                             ℓ
 1: Initialize: an all-one vector v := (1, 1, . . . , 1) ∈ F2
 2: Initialize: s := 1
 3: for i = 0, . . . , ℓ − 1 do
 4:    for j = s − 1, . . . , 0 do
 5:        v[j + s] := v[j] · wi
 6:        v[j] := v[j] − v[j + s]
 7:    end for
 8:    s := s · 2
 9: end for
10: return v




                                                       30
                     e [1:i] , x) : x ∈ {0, 1}i } for all i ∈ [ℓ]
Procedure 4 Compute {eq(w
Input: w ∈ Fℓ
                                                e [1:i] , x) for all i = 1, . . . , ℓ and x ∈ {0, 1}i
Output: v1 , . . . , vℓ such that vi [nat(x)] = eq(w
                                              i
 1: Initialize: empty vectors vi of size 2 for all i = 1, . . . , ℓ.
 2: Initialize: v0 := (1) and s := 1
 3: for i = 0, . . . , ℓ − 1 do
 4:    for j = s − 1, . . . , 0 do
 5:        vi+1 [j + s] := vi [j] · wi
 6:        vi+1 [j] := vi [j] − vi+1 [j + s]
 7:    end for
 8:    s := s · 2
 9: end for
10: return v1 , . . . , vℓ


   We also derive a procedure to compute the round polynomial si (X) = eq(w    e [:i] , (r[<i] , X)) · ti (X) given
evaluations {ti (c)}c∈Ubd and the claimed equality si (0) + si (1) = Ti , where Ti is the claimed value of the
round. This is given in Procedure 5, and can easily be seen to be correct.

Procedure 5 Compute s(X) = ℓ(X) · t(X) given evaluations {t(c)}c∈Ubd and the condition s(0) + s(1) = T
Input: Evaluations {t(c)}c∈Ubd for a polynomial t(X) of degree d, a linear polynomial ℓ(X) with ℓ(0) ̸= 0,
    and a target sum T ∈ F
Output: Polynomial s(X) of degree d + 1 such that s(0) + s(1) = T and s(X) = ℓ(X) · t(X)
 1: Compute t(0) = ℓ(0)−1 · (T − ℓ(1) · t(1)).
 2: Interpolate t(X) from {t(c)}c∈Ud .
 3: return s(X) = ℓ(X) · t(X).



Exact cost of the memoized equality-polynomial procedures. For Procedure 3, across rounds i =
0, . . . , ℓ − 1, each round performs exactly 2i bb multiplications and 2i additions; summing gives (2ℓ − 1) bb
multiplications and (2ℓ −1) additions. For Procedure 4, the arithmetic counts are identical, and it additionally
                                     Pℓ
materializes vectors of total size i=1 2i = 2ℓ+1 − 2.




                                                           31
B       Implementation details for field arithmetic
B.1     Optimized multiplication by small integers
We present a two-stage algorithm for multiplying a large field element in Montgomery form with a 64-
bit unsigned integer. The key idea is to separate the initial integer multiplication from the final modular
reduction.

B.1.1    Bignum multiplication
Given a field element a′ = aR (mod p) represented by N 64-bit limbs and a 64-bit integer b, we first compute
the integer product c = a′ · b. This is a standard multi-precision multiplication of an N -limb number by a
single-limb number, which costs N native 64-bit multiplications and results in an (N + 1)-limb integer c.

B.1.2    Barrett reduction for (N + 1)-limb integers
After obtaining the integer product c, we apply a specialized Barrett reduction to compute c (mod p). This
reduction is optimized for inputs that are only slightly larger than the modulus (i.e., (N + 1) limbs). The
algorithm is presented in Procedure 6.

Procedure 6 Optimized Barrett reduction for an (N + 1)-limb integer
Input:
    • An (N + 1)-limb integer c = (cN , . . . , c0 ).
    • Precomputed constant µ = ⌊264 · 2np /(2p)⌋.
Output: c mod p as a N -limb integer.
 1: Let c̃ = ⌈c/2np ⌉.                                                       ▷ Round up the high part of c
 2: Compute m := ⌊(c̃ · µ)/264 ⌋.                                               ▷ Estimate quotient c/(2p)
 3: Compute r := c − m · 2p.                                                  ▷ Signed result −2p < r < 4p
 4: If r < 0, set r ← r + 2p.                                                          ▷ Correct underflow
 5: Find k ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3} such that kp ≤ r < (k + 1)p, and compute c′ = r − kp.
 6: return c′


Lemma 8. Assume 2np −1 < p < 2np and input c satisfies 0 ≤ c < p · 264 . Then the Barrett reduction
in Procedure 6 is correct.
Proof. Let q = ⌊c/(2p)⌋, and write c = ĉ · 2np − δ where ĉ = ⌈c/2np ⌉ and 0 ≤ δ < 2np . The key claim is that
m := ⌊(ĉ · µ)/264 ⌋ satisfies q − 1 ≤ m ≤ q + 1.
   Upper bound (m ≤ q + 1). Since µ ≤ 2np +64 /(2p) and c = ĉ · 2np − δ ≥ (ĉ − 1) · 2np :

                               ĉ · µ   ĉ · 2np   c+δ    c   2 np
                         m≤           ≤          =     ≤    +      < q + 1 + 1 = q + 2.
                                264         2p      2p   2p   2p

The last step uses δ < 2np < 2p (since p > 2np −1 ). Since m and q are integers, m ≤ q + 1.
   Lower bound (q − 1 ≤ m). Write µ = 2np +64 /(2p) − ε where 0 ≤ ε < 1. Then:

                                       ĉ · µ   ĉ · 2np  ĉ · ε c+δ  ĉ · ε
                                              =          − 64 =      − 64 .
                                        264         2p     2      2p   2

Since c < p · 264 we have ĉ ≤ p · 264−np + 1 < 264 (using p < 2np ), so ĉ · ε/264 < 1. Also δ/(2p) < 2np /(2p) < 1.
Thus ĉ · µ/264 > c/(2p) − 1, giving m = ⌊ĉ · µ/264 ⌋ > q − 2, i.e., m ≥ q − 1.
    Combining: m ∈ {q − 1, q, q + 1}, so r = c − m · 2p satisfies −2p < r < 4p. After correcting underflow
(r < 0 =⇒ r ← r + 2p), we have 0 ≤ r < 4p, and r ≡ c (mod p). The final conditional subtraction of kp
for k ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3} then yields c mod p.




                                                         32
B.1.3    Alternative: Montgomery reduction
For the linear combination optimization described in the main body, it is also possible to use Montgomery
reduction on the final sum T , instead
                                 P     of Barrett reduction. A Montgomery reduction would compute T · R−1
(mod p). The result would be ( i ci ai ) (mod p), which is the correct value but is no longer in Montgomery
form. If the surrounding protocol can accommodate a value in standard form, this is a valid alternative.
However, a generic Montgomery reduction is typically more costly than the specialized single-pass Barrett
reduction we employ, so Barrett reduction is generally preferred for this optimization.

B.2     Extension field multiplication
In both monomial and tower bases, multiplication of extension field elements can be accelerated using
variants of Karatsuba’s algorithm [36]. For an extension of degree k, this reduces the number of base field
multiplications from k 2 to O(k log2 3 ) ≈ O(k 1.585 ). For the monomial basis, Karatsuba’s algorithm is used
for polynomial multiplication. For the tower basis, it is applied recursively to multiply elements in smaller
subfields.

B.3     Hardware considerations
In FPGAs and ASICs, multiplication in binary fields is highly efficient when field elements are represented us-
ing a tower basis. Current CPUs, however, do not natively support efficient multiplication in the tower basis,
but they do support fast multiplication in a different (monomial) basis for GF(2128 ), known as POLYVAL. For
instance, ARMv8 provides the PMULL instruction, which efficiently multiplies two 64-bit inputs. To extend
multiplication to 128-bit inputs, one can apply the techniques described in [32, Algorithms 2 and 3], which
invoke PMULL multiple times. Indeed, BearSSL13 contains optimized implementations of GF(2128 ) multipli-
cation in the POLYVAL basis for both x86 64 and ARM64 architectures, utilizing the PMULL instruction
for ARM64 and the PCLMULQDQ instruction for x86 64 [25]. Additionally, Intel’s Galois Field instruction
set (GFNI), originally targeting GF(28 ) multiplications for AES computations, can be leveraged—together
with Karatsuba’s algorithm—to achieve reasonably efficient GF(2128 ) multiplications by decomposing bigger
operations into sequences of smaller ones.


C       Details of sum-check prover algorithms
In this section, we give full details of the three existing algorithms for the sum-check prover (spanning the
time-space trade-off spectrum) with a fine-grained analysis of their cost in each round. We also give missing
details of the combined small-value and streaming algorithm in Section 5, along with the equality polynomial
handling in Section 6. As with the main body, we focus on the product of multilinear polynomials case, where
the polynomial g(x) is given as
                                         g(X) = p1 (X) · p2 (X) · · · pd (X),                             (8)
with p1 , . . . , pd being multilinear polynomials in ℓ variables. Recall that we denote M = 2ℓ to be the instance
size.

C.1     Linear time and linear space
The first algorithm we consider is the linear-time, linear-space algorithm from prior work [61, 58]. The key
idea of LinearTimeSC is that, by maintaining a cache of the partial evaluations of the polynomials p1 , . . . , pd
at (r1 , . . . , ri−1 ) in each round i, the prover can compute the round polynomial si (u) and update the cache
for the next round in O(d2 · 2ℓ−i ) time, leading to O(d2 · 2ℓ ) time in total. Unfortunately, storing the cache,
especially after the first round, requires O(d · 2ℓ ) space as well.
    Figure 4 gives the full details of LinearTimeSC . The prover maintains d arrays P1 , . . . , Pd , which initially
store all evaluations of p1 , . . . , pd over {0, 1}ℓ , e.g., we have Pk [x] = pk (x) for all k ∈ [d] and x ∈ {0, 1}ℓ . The
prover halves the size of the arrays after each round i, via “binding” the arrays {Pk }k∈[d] to the challenge ri
received from the verifier.
 13 https://bearssl.org/




                                                            33
                                                             LinearTimeSC
                                        (0)         (0)
Initialize: Length-2ℓ arrays P1 , . . . , Pd              such that
                                  (0)
                                Pk [x] = pk (x)             for all k = 1, . . . , d and x ∈ {0, 1}ℓ .

For each round i = 1, . . . , ℓ:

1. For u ∈ U
           bd , compute si (u) using the formula

                                         d                                                                   
                                                    (i−1)                 (i−1)                   (i−1)
                              X          Y
                                                   Pk       [1, x′ ] − Pk         [0, x′ ] · u + Pk     [0, x′ ] .
                          x′ ∈{0,1}ℓ−i k=1

       n               o
2. Send si (u) : u ∈ U
                     bd to the verifier.

3. Receive challenge ri ∈ F from the verifier.
4. For k = 1, . . . , d and x′ ∈ {0, 1}ℓ−i , update arrays:
                                                                           
                              (i)           (i−1)             (i−1)                  (i−1)
                            Pk [x′ ] := Pk        [1, x′ ] − Pk     [0, x′ ] · ri + Pk     [0, x′ ].

          (i)
Note: Pk [x′ ] = pk (r[1:i] , x′ )      ∀ k ∈ [d], i ∈ [0, ℓ], x′ ∈ {0, 1}ℓ−i .

                                 Figure 4: Linear time, linear space prover [61, 58]


C.1.1    Cost analysis of LinearTimeSC .
We now give a fine-grained analysis of the cost of LinearTimeSC .

   • Per-round operations: In each round i ∈ [ℓ], the prover first computes the evaluations of the round
polynomial si (u) for all u ∈ U
                              cd , then updates an auxiliary array for the subsequent round.

   • Cost of evaluations: The computation of each of the d evaluations for si involves a sum over 2ℓ−i
terms. Each term is a product of d values, requiring d − 1 multiplications. Note that we may compute the
evaluations of each pk at 0, ∞, 2, . . . purely by additions and subtractions, requiring no multiplications.
  – Cost: d × (d − 1) × 2ℓ−i multiplications.
   • Cost of array updates: The prover updates an array of size d · 2ℓ−i . This requires one multiplication
per entry.
  – Cost: d · 2ℓ−i multiplications.
   • Total cost for round i: The total number of multiplications in round i is the sum of these two steps:

                                               d(d − 1) · 2ℓ−i + d · 2ℓ−i = d2 · 2ℓ−i .

   • Total cost across all rounds: Summing over all ℓ rounds, the total number of multiplications is:
                                     ℓ
                                     X                         ℓ−1
                                                               X
                                              d2 · 2ℓ−i = d2         2j = d2 (2ℓ − 1) ≈ d2 · M.
                                     i=1                       j=0

The additions / subtractions are of the same order: generating the d evaluations of each linear factor already
costs d(d − 1)2ℓ−i additions per round, so the total is Θ(d2 · M ).


                                                                     34
                                                        LogSpaceSC

For each round i = 1, . . . , ℓ:
1. For u ∈ U
           bd , compute si (u) by streaming through the inputs:
                                                                                     
                                    X     Yd      X
                       si (u) =                          e [<i] , b) · pk (b, u, x′ ) ,
                                                         eq(r                                                          (9)
                                     x′ ∈{0,1}ℓ−i k=1    b∈{0,1}i−1


where the values eq(r
                 e [<i] , b) are computed on-the-fly for each b.

2. Send {si (u) : u ∈ U
                      bd } to the verifier.

3. Receive challenge ri ∈ F from the verifier.


                            Figure 5: Quasilinear time, logarithmic space prover [21]


   Thus, in the general case, where none of pk have small evaluations, we have the following cost summary.
Lemma 9. For general multilinear polynomials p1 , . . . , pd over the finite field F, LinearTimeSC performs
exactly d2 (M − 1) field multiplications and Θ(d2 · M ) field additions/subtractions.

When the evaluations of p1 , . . . , pd are small. In this case, we have that the computation of s1 (u) in
round 1 are entirely ss multiplications. The binding of the arrays in round 1 now use sb multiplications.

When all but one of the polynomials p1 , . . . , pd have small evaluations. In this case (which happens
for instance when one of the pi terms is the equality polynomial eq(w,e x) for some w ∈ Fℓ chosen prior by
the verifier), we must convert d · M/2 multiplications in the computation of s1 (u) from ss (in the case where
all of p1 , . . . , pd have small evaluations) to sb multiplications.

C.2     Quasilinear time and logarithmic space
Next, we describe LogSpaceSC , a sum-check prover implementation with O(ℓ · 2ℓ ) time and O(ℓ) space [21].
This algorithm avoids storing large tables of partially evaluated polynomials by recomputing the necessary
values from the initial streams in each round.
    The core idea is that for each round i, the prover can compute the partial evaluations pk (r1 , . . . , ri−1 , u, x′ )
directly from the initial inputs by applying the multilinear extension formula (Equation (2)). This involves
summing over the Boolean hypercube of dimension i − 1. The Lagrange coefficients eq(r     e [<i] , b) needed for
this expansion can be generated in a streaming fashion, requiring only O(i) space. As the prover iterates
through all inputs for each round, no large state needs to be maintained between rounds.

C.2.1    Cost analysis of LogSpaceSC .
We first analyze the general case (no small-evaluation assumption), then state the changes in the small-
evaluation setting.

   • Per-round operations: In round i ∈ [ℓ] and for each u ∈ U     cd (there are d such points), we stream
          ′        ℓ−i          ′
over all x ∈ {0, 1} . For each x and each k ∈ [d] we compute the inner sum
                                             X
                              Sk (u, x′ ) :=       e [<i] , b) · pk (b, u, x′ ).
                                                   eq(r
                                                 b∈{0,1}i−1


We then multiply the d values {Sk (u, x′ )}dk=1 and add the product into si (u).


                                                            35
   • Cost of inner sums Sk : For fixed (u, x′ , k), the sum has 2i−1 terms. Each term multiplies a big
            e [<i] , b) by a big value pk (b, u, x′ ), so each such multiply is a bb multiply. The additions to
coefficient eq(r
accumulate the sum are over field elements.
  – Multiplies per (u, x′ , k): 2i−1 bb.
  – Adds per (u, x′ , k): 2i−1 − 1.
  – Per round i across all u, x′ , k: d (choices of u) × 2ℓ−i (choices of x′ ) × d (choices of k) × 2i−1
    = d2 · 2ℓ−1 bb multiplies.
  – Adds per round i across all u, x′ , k: d2 · (2ℓ−1 − 2ℓ−i ).
   • Cost of forming the product across k: For each (u, x′ ), we multiply d big values S1 , . . . , Sd to
produce their product, which requires d − 1 bb multiplies.
  – Per round i across all u, x′ : d (choices of u) × 2ℓ−i (choices of x′ ) × (d − 1) = d(d − 1) · 2ℓ−i bb
    multiplies.
   • Cost to generate eq(r e [<i] , ·) coefficients: The 2i−1 coefficients can be generated once per round via
                                                                                                  Pi−1
the standard doubling recurrence C 7→ ((1 − rj ) · C, rj · C) for j = 1, . . . , i − 1. This costs j=1 2j = 2i − 2
multiplications; these are bb. This table (or an equivalent on-the-fly generator) is shared by all u, x′ , k in
round i.
  – Per round i: O(2i ) multiplications (predominantly bb), plus O(2i ) additions.
   • Total cost for round i (general case):
                                   2
                                  d   2ℓ−1}
                                  | ·{z            + d(d − 1) · 2ℓ−i +      (2i − 2) .
                                                     |     {z      }        | {z }
                              bb from inner sums      bb from products    bb from coeffs

Additions: d2 · (2ℓ−1 − 2ℓ−i ) from inner sums and O(2i ) from coefficient generation.
   • Totals across all rounds (general case):
   bb multiplications:
                                 ℓ 
                                 X                                         
                                       d2 2ℓ−1 + d(d − 1)2ℓ−i + (2i − 2)
                                 i=1
                               = d2 ℓ 2ℓ−1 + d(d − 1)(2ℓ − 1) + (2ℓ+1 − 2ℓ − 2).
                               = Θ(d2 ℓ 2ℓ ).
             Pℓ                      
Additions:    i=1   d2 (2ℓ−1 − 2ℓ−i ) + (2ℓ+1 − 2) = d2 (ℓ 2ℓ−1 − 2ℓ + 1) + 2ℓ+1 − 2.
    • Space Complexity: We maintain O(1) accumulators per u and per k, plus an O(i)-state generator
    e [<i] , ·). Hence O(d + i) words in round i, i.e., O(d + ℓ) overall.
for eq(r

Small-evaluation setting. When all pk (b, u, x′ ) are small at Boolean points, the inner-sum multiplies
become sb (counts unchanged): d2 2ℓ−1 sb multiplications per round (and d2 (2ℓ−1 − 2ℓ−i ) additions). The
product-across-k and coefficient-generation costs remain bb with exact totals as above, i.e., d(d − 1)(2ℓ −
1) + (2ℓ+1 − 2ℓ − 2) bb multiplications across all rounds.
    Recalling that M = 2ℓ is the instance size, and rewriting in terms of M , we have the following cost
summary (in the general case).
                                                               d2
Lemma 10. In the general case, LogSpaceSC performs                M log M + d(d − 1)(M − 1) + (2M − 2 log M − 2)
                                                               2
                       d2
bb multiplications and    (M log M − 2M + 2) + (2M − 2) additions in total, and uses O(d + log M ) space.
                        2
                                     d2
In the small-evaluation setting, the    M log M inner-sum bb multiplications become sb.
                                     2

                                                          36
                                                          CrossProductk,SC

 Inputs: Streams of evaluations for p1 , . . . , pd over {0, 1}ℓ ; parameter k ≥ 2.
 Setup: Let ℓ be the number of variables, M := 2ℓ the instance size, η := d/(d − 1), and ℓ0 := ⌊ℓ/(kd)⌋.
 For every round j ∈ [ℓ]:
 1. Initialize P ← 0.             indicates whether a pass is executed.

 2. Time-constrained phase (j < (d − 1) ℓ0 ):
 (a) If j = ⌈η t ⌉ for some t ∈ N, set P ← 1 and j ′ := ⌈η t ⌉.
 (b) Define w(j ′ ) := min(max(1, ⌈η t+1 ⌉ − ⌈η t ⌉), ℓ − j ′ + 1).                           rounds handled by the pass

 3. Space-constrained phase (j ≥ (d − 1) ℓ0 ):
 (a) If ℓ0 | j, set P ← 1 and j ′ := ℓ0 · ⌈j/ℓ0 ⌉.
 (b) Define w(j ′ ) := min(ℓ0 , ℓ − j ′ + 1).
                                                                                                                   ′
 4. If P = 1 (necessarily j = j ′ ): Let the received challenges be r[<j ′ ] ∈ Fj −1 . For all x1 , . . . , xd ∈
          ′
 {0, 1}w(j ) , compute and store

                                                                       X              d
                                                                                      Y
                                 Mj ′ [x1 , . . . , xd ] :=                                  pt (r[<j ′ ] , xt , b).
                                                              b∈{0,1} ℓ−j ′ −w(j ′ )+1 t=1


 5. At the current round j (necessarily j ∈ {j ′ , j ′ + 1, . . . , j ′ + w(j ′ ) − 1}):
 (a) Let ∆ := j − j ′ and let r′ ∈ F∆ denote the suffix of r[<j] after r[<j ′ ] (i.e., the challenges received so
 far in this stage).
 (b) For all z ∈ Ubd ,

                                  d
                                                    !
                  X               Y                               X               X              ∗           ∗
                                        e ′ , βt ) ·                                         z |b | (1−z)d−|b | Mj ′ β1 ∥b∗1 ∥b, . . . , βd ∥b∗d ∥b .
                                                                                                                                                  
 fj (z) =                               eq(r
            β1 ,...,βd ∈{0,1}∆    t=1                   b∈{0,1} w(j ′ )−∆−1 b∗ ∈{0,1}d


 (c) Send {fj (z) : z ∈ U
                        bd } to V.
 (d) Receive rj from V.


Figure 6: Cross-product-based streaming prover for products of d multilinear polynomials with parameter
k [10].


C.3     Streaming via cross products
C.3.1   Cost analysis of CrossProductk,SC .
We give a fine-grained accounting for the general d-polynomial setting. We default to the general (no small-
evaluation) case (all multiplications are bb unless stated otherwise). Costs are split between: (i) passes that
build the tables Mj ′ at stage starts j ′ ; and (ii) the per-round message computations within a stage.

Per-pass cost at stage start j ′ .               Let the stage window be w := w(j ′ ) ∈ N (defined in Figure 6). There
              ′
are B := 2 ℓ−j −w+1 values of b.




                                                                        37
   • Compute Xt [βt ] for each t ∈ [d]: For a fixed b and βt ∈ {0, 1}w ,
                                           X
                             Xt [βt ] :=           e [<j ′ ] , x) · pt (x, βt , b).
                                                   eq(r
                                                    x∈{0,1}j ′ −1
                                                ′                                   ′
Exact operations (per b): for each t, 2j −1 multiplications and 2j −1 − 1 additions; across 2w choices of βt
and all d polynomials this is
                                            ′                                   ′
                                d 2w (2j −1 ) mults            and d 2w (2j −1 − 1) adds.
                                        ′                                                                ′
Aggregated across all b’s: d B 2w (2j −1 ) = d 2ℓ = d M multiplications and d B 2w (2j −1 − 1) ≤ d 2ℓ = d M
additions.
   • Form the d-wise product and accumulate into Mj ′ : For each β⃗ = (β1 , . . . , βd ) ∈ ({0, 1}w )d ,
        Qd                              ⃗ This takes (d − 1) multiplications and 1 addition per entry. There
compute t=1 Xt [βt ] and add into Mj ′ [β].
are 2 entries, hence per b we use (d − 1) 2dw multiplications and 2dw additions. Across all b’s this is
     dw


                                      (d − 1) B 2dw mults                and   B 2dw adds.
                                                                                         ′
Our scheduling ensures (d − 1)w ≤ j ′ (both phases), so B 2dw = 2ℓ−j −w+1+dw ≤ 2ℓ+1 = 2M . Thus this
product-and-accumulate step is bounded by at most 2(d − 1) M multiplications and 2M additions per pass.
Per-pass total (exact upper bound):
                             dM
                             |{z}     + 2(d − 1) M = (3d − 2) M multiplications,
                                        | {z }
                            Xt sums             products

and at most (d + 2) M additions.

Per-round cost within a stage [j ′ , j ′ + w − 1].                  Write ∆ := j − j ′ ∈ {0, . . . , w − 1}.
    • Generate Lagrange coefficients for the recent challenges r′ ∈ F∆ : Generate {eq(r       e ′ , b) : b ∈
      ∆                                                            ∆+1
{0, 1} } once and reuse it across all t ∈ [d]. Exact per round: (2     − 2) multiplications and (2∆+1 − 2)
additions (shared across fj (0), fj (1), fj (z)).
   • Form inner partial sums over Mj ′ : For each (b1 , . . . , bd ) ∈ {0, 1}∆d and each pattern b∗ ∈ {0, 1}d ,
take the sum over b ∈ {0, 1}w−∆−1 of the relevant Mj ′ entries. This is additions-only: exactly 2w−∆−1 − 1
additions per pair, giving [2w−∆−1 − 1] · 2d(∆+1) additions.
   • Scale by coefficient products and assemble fj :
                                        Qd
  – Compute the coefficient products t=1 eq(r e ′ , bt ) once per tuple (b1 , . . . , bd ), costing (d − 1) 2d∆ multi-
    plications.
  – For u ∈ {0, 1}: apply the cached coefficient product to the two relevant partial sums, costing 2 2d∆
    multiplications.
                                                                      ∗                ∗
  – For fj (z): combine the 2d patterns b∗ ∈ {0, 1}d with weights z |b | (1−z)d−|b | . This costs 2d 2d∆ multipli-
    cations for the weights, (2d −1) 2d∆ additions to sum the weighted terms, and a final 2d∆ multiplications
    to scale by the cached coefficient product.
Per-round totals:
                        mults = (2∆+1 − 2) + d + 2 + 2d 2d∆ ,
                                                       

                         adds = (2∆+1 − 2) + 2w−∆−1 − 1 2d(∆+1) + (2d − 1) 2d∆ .
                                                         

Summing ∆ = 0 to w − 1 within the stage gives
                                            w−1
                                            X
                                                    (2∆+1 − 2) = 2 (2w − 1) − 2w,
                                            ∆=0
                                 w−1
                                 X                                   2dw − 1
                                        d + 2 + 2d 2d∆ = d + 2 + 2d
                                                  
                                                                              .
                                                                       2d − 1
                                 ∆=0


                                                                    38
                                                       CrossProductSC

Let ℓ0 = ⌊ℓ/(2d)⌋.
Time-constrained phase (1 ≤ j < (d − 1)ℓ0 ):
• Passes are made in rounds j ′ = ⌈η t ⌉ for t ∈ N where η = d/(d − 1). Let wj ′ = max(1, ⌈η t+1 ⌉ − ⌈η t ⌉).
                                                                                                                  ′
• In round j ′ , for each of the d polynomials pi , compute and store tables Pi [bi , xi ] for bi ∈ {0, 1}j −1 and
xi ∈ {0, 1}wj′ .
• Compute and store table Mj ′ for x1 , . . . , xd ∈ {0, 1}wj′

                                                                    X            d
                                                                                 Y
                              Mj ′ [x1 , . . . , xd ] :=                                pi (r[<j ′ ] , xi , b).
                                                                    ℓ−j ′ −w ′ +1 i=1
                                                            b∈{0,1}         j




Space-constrained phase ((d − 1)ℓ0 ≤ j ≤ ℓ):

• Passes are made every ℓ0 rounds.
• In round j ′ , compute and store table Mj ′ for x1 , . . . , xd ∈ {0, 1}ℓ0

                                                                    X           d
                                                                                Y
                               Mj ′ [x1 , . . . , xd ] :=                           pi (r[<j ′ ] , xi , b).
                                                                        ′
                                                            b∈{0,1}ℓ−j −ℓ0 +1 i=1




                  Figure 7: Cross-product-based streaming prover following prior work [10]


Hence, within a stage the round-message work is O(2dw ) multiplications and O(2dw ) additions. Since our
schedule ensures 2dw ≤ M 1/k , each stage contributes at most cd M 1/k multiplications for cd := (d + 2 +
2d )/(2d − 1) + 2.
                                                                                             
Number of stages and overall time. The number of passes (stages) is Θ logη (ℓ0 ) + d k with η =
d/(d − 1) and ℓ0 = ⌊ℓ/(kd)⌋. Combining with the per-pass bound, the total multiplication count is

                      (3d − 2) M × ⌈logη (ℓ0 )⌉ + d k + O (logη (ℓ0 ) + d k) M 1/k ,
                                                                                 
                      | {z }        |      {z        }
                           per pass              num. passes
                                                                                                   
which, using logη (x) = ln(x)/ ln(d/(d − 1)) = Θ(d log x), simplifies to Θ d2 · M · (log log M + k) big-field
                                                            
multiplications, plus a lower-order O d(log log M + k) M 1/k tail.

Small-evaluation variant. If each pt (x) is small on Boolean inputs, then multiplications inside the Xt
sums are sb (counts unchanged). All other multiplications (coefficient generation, d-wise products, and the
z-weights) remain bb.

Switch to folding-based sum-check in the final ℓ/k rounds. As suggested in prior work [10] (see
discussion after Fig. 2 therein), one can switch from CrossProductk,SC to the folding-based prover from prior
work [21, 58] for the final ℓ/k rounds. This preserves the O(M 1/k ) space and reduces the tail cost; we defer
a detailed cost derivation for this switch to a later subsection.
    Next, we describe the cross-product algorithm in its k = 2 specialization (the familiar O(M 1/2 )-space
setting from Baweja et al. [10]). Let ℓ0 = ⌊ℓ/(2d)⌋.



                                                                   39
   The protocol is split into two phases. The space-constrained phase begins at round (d − 1)ℓ0 . In this
phase, a pass is made over the input streams every ℓ0 rounds. The time-constrained phase covers rounds
j < (d − 1)ℓ0 . In this phase, passes are made in rounds j ′ = ⌈η t ⌉ for t ∈ N, where η = d/(d − 1).
   The computation of the round polynomial si (u) for a round i within a stage (that started at round j ′ )
                                                   ′                                                   ′
can be expressed as an inner product. Let r<i−j         ′ be the challenges received between round j     and i − 1.
                                                               ′
The value si (u) is a sum over the remaining variables x of a product of polynomials evaluated at the full
                              ′
challenge vector (r[<j ′ ] , r<i−j ′ ). By expanding this expression similarly to the derivation in Section C.1, we

can separate the challenge-dependent parts from the precomputed parts:
                                               d
                                              XY
                                                                          ′            ′
                                  si (u) =                pk (r[<j ′ ] , r<i−j ′ , u, x )

                                               x′   k=1
                                                                        d
                                                                                              !
                                                       X                Y
                                                                                    ′
                                          =                                   χbk (r<i−j ′) ·
                                              b1 ,...,bd ∈{0,1} i−j ′   k=1

                                                     d
                                                                                          !
                                                    XY
                                                                                      ′
                                                               pk (r[<j ′ ] , bk , u, x ) .
                                                    x′ k=1

The second term, x′ k pk (r[<j ′ ] , bk , u, x′ ), can be computed from the precomputed table Mj ′ . The first
                     P Q
term consists of products of Lagrange basis polynomial evaluations, which depend only on the recent chal-
        ′
lenges r<i−j ′ . This structure allows the prover to compute si (u) efficiently without new passes over the full

dataset.
                                                                                                              
Lemma 11. For any k ≥ 2, the cross-product-based streaming prover runs in time Θ d2 · M · (log log M + k)
and uses O(M 1/k ) space.

C.4     Combined small value and streaming via evaluation-basis products
C.4.1    Analysis of the small value algorithm
We analyze the early-window variant of EvalProductSVSC (Figure 2) for the small-value setting where all
input polynomials p1 , . . . , pd have small evaluations on {0, 1}ℓ .
   The algorithm defers binding by v rounds, computing the window polynomial
                                                            X           d
                                                                        Y
                               q(X1 , . . . , Xv ) =                        pk (X1 , . . . , Xv , x′ )
                                                       x′ ∈{0,1}ℓ−v k=1

on the (d + 1)v evaluation grid using the multivariate product engine (Procedure 1), then answering v rounds
from this grid.
   The cost has two components:
   • Big-multiplication tail: The remaining ℓ − v rounds cost Θ(d2 M/2v ) big multiplications.
   • Window computation: For each of the M/2v suffix assignments, we compute one (d + 1)v grid via
multivariate products. For v = 1 this costs Θ((d + 1) log d) per suffix, while for every fixed v ≥ 2 it costs
   v
Θ(d
  ) = Θ((d   + 1)v ) per suffix. In the early-window regime of interest we therefore summarize the total as
             
        d+1 v
Θ M· 2          small multiplications, up to d-independent constants.

  Let κ be the big-to-small multiplication cost ratio (typically κ ≈ 2N 2 + N where N is the limb count).
We optimize in big-multiplication-equivalent units:
                                                                      v
                                                  d2 M
                                                               
                                                          M      d+1
                                 Costbig-eqv (v) = v +       ·           .
                                                    2     κ        2
Ignoring integrality and clipping, the minimizer satisfies equality of the two terms:
                                                   v∗
                               d2 M
                                             
                                        M      d+1                      ∗
                                     =     ·             ⇐⇒ (d + 1)v = d2 κ.
                                2v∗     κ       2

                                                                  40
   Thus the unconstrained optimum is
                                                          2 log d + log κ
                                        v ∗ = logd+1 d2 κ =                ,
                                                             log(d + 1)
then clipped to [0, ℓ] and rounded to an integer.
   At v ∗ , both terms contribute equally, giving big-multiplication-equivalent runtime
                                                                            
                                   (big eqv)
                                TSV          (M, d, κ) = Θ M · d2−2/δ · κ−1/δ ,

where δ = log2 (d + 1); equivalently,
                                                                      −1/δ 
                                    (big eqv)
                                   TSV          (M, d, κ) = Θ M d2 d2 κ        .
                                                                                           ∗
   The dominant space term is the stored window grid, so Space(v ∗ ) = Θ((d + 1)v ) = Θ(d2 κ) (up to
constant factors).
Lemma 12 (Small-value early window: optimal cost and space). For cost ratio κ between big and small
multiplications, the unconstrained minimizer is v ∗ = logd+1 (d2 κ), then clipped/rounded to a valid round
                             ∗
count. At this v ∗ , (d + 1)v ≍ d2 κ, yielding:
   • Big-multiplication-equivalent runtime: Θ M · d2−2/δ · κ−1/δ
                                                                 

                               ∗
   • Space usage: Θ((d + 1)v ) = Θ(d2 κ) (vs O(d · M ) for LinearTimeSC )
with δ = log2 (d + 1).

C.4.2    Analysis of the streaming algorithm
We analyze the evaluation-basis (round-batched) variant from Section 5. The algorithm materializes, per
pass, an evaluation grid for a window polynomial and answers all rounds within the window from this grid.
We compare with Baweja et al. [10].

Per-pass time bound. Fix a pass at j ′ with window size ω. Each pass has two main cost components:
(i) prefix adaptation, where we must stream through all inputs to form the partial evaluations pk (r[<j ′ ] , ·)
                                e [<j ′ ] , ·), costing Θ(d · M ) big-field multiplications; and (ii) window grid
by applying Lagrange weights eq(r
computation, where we materialize the (d + 1)ω evaluation grid. With the multivariate product engine
(Section 4), the grid computation costs
                                 (
                                   Θ((d + 1) log d) ω = 1,
                      T (d, ω) =
                                   Θ((d + 1)ω )          ω ≥ 2 (d-independent constant).

Under the constraint (δ − 1)ω ≤ j ′ , we have T (d, ω) = O(M ), so the grid work is absorbed by the Θ(d · M )
prefix adaptation cost. Hence the total per-pass cost is Θ(d · M ) big-field multiplications.

Number of passes. With ωt ≈ jt′ /(δ − 1), the starts satisfy jt+1
                                                               ′
                                                                   ≈ jt′ + ωt ≈ αjt′ , so the time-constrained
phase takes Θ(logα ℓ) = Θ(log d · log log M ) passes. The space-constrained phase uses fixed ω = ℓ/(kδ)
and requires Θ(kδ) = Θ(k log d) passes. Total passes are therefore Θ(log d · log log M + k log d) = Θ(log d ·
(log log M + k)).

Overall time and space. The number of time-constrained passes is ⌈logα ℓ⌉ with α = δ/(δ − 1), and
Θ(kδ) = Θ(k log d) space-constrained passes. Each pass costs Θ(d · M ) big-field multiplications due to prefix
adaptation. Therefore
                                                                   
                            T (M, d, k) = Θ d · M · (logα ℓ + kδ)
                                                                                 
                                        = Θ d · M · (log d · log log M + k log d) ,

                                          = ln(δ/(δ − 1)) ≈ 1/(δ − 1) = Θ(1/ log d). Factoring out log d, this
where we used logα ℓ = ln ℓ/ ln α and ln α
becomes Θ d · M · log d · (log log M + k) . The space usage is O(M 1/k ) by construction.


                                                          41
Comparison with Baweja et al. Their coefficient-based streaming yields Θ(d2 · M · (log log M + k)) (up
to growth-base constants). Our evaluation-basis streaming achieves Θ(d·M ·log d·(log log M +k)), improving
by roughly a factor of d/ log d over the prior approach, while preserving O(M 1/k ) space.

Lower-order terms. If one multiplies d factors pointwise without reuse, the exact big-multiplication count
is (d − 1)(d + 1)ω . The recursive product replaces this with O((d + 1) log d) when ω = 1 and with O((d + 1)ω )
for every fixed ω ≥ 2. Additions and small-by-big operations contribute lower-order terms that do not change
the asymptotic in M .

Dependence on d: old vs. new.           For the existing algorithm of Baweja et al. [10], the d-dependence per
phase is:

   • Time-constrained phase: logη (ℓ) passes with η = d/(d − 1), so ≈ (d − 1) ln ℓ = Θ(d log log M ). Per-pass
     d-dependence Θ(d), yielding Θ(d2 · M · log log M ).
   • Space-constrained phase: Θ(dk) passes (window size ℓ/(dk)), each Θ(d · M ), for Θ(d2 · M · k).

   For the new algorithm, the d-dependence per phase is:
   • Time-constrained phase: logα (ℓ) passes with α = δ/(δ − 1), so ≈ (δ − 1) ln ℓ = Θ(log d · log log M ).
     Per-pass cost Θ(d · M ) due to prefix adaptation, yielding overall Θ(d · M · log d · log log M ).
   • Space-constrained phase: Θ(kδ) = Θ(k log d) passes (window size ℓ/(kδ)), each Θ(d · M ) for prefix
     adaptation, totaling Θ(d · M · k log d).

C.5      Equality Polynomial Optimization: Full Algorithm and Analysis
This appendix provides the complete algorithm and analysis for handling equality polynomials in windowed
sum-check, as summarized in Section 6.

C.5.1    Detailed algorithm for windowed equality handling
                                                       Qd
Consider computing sum-check for g(X) = eq(w,e     X) · k=1 pk (X) using a window of v rounds starting at
position i. The polynomial we need to evaluate is:
                                               X
                       q(X1 , . . . , Xv ) =           eq(w,
                                                        e    (r[<i] , X1 , . . . , Xv , x′ ))
                                            x′ ∈{0,1}ℓ−i−v+1
                                                   d
                                                   Y
                                               ·         pk (r[<i] , X1 , . . . , Xv , x′ ).
                                                   k=1

   Using the decomposability of eq,
                                e we rewrite this as:
                                                            v
                                                            Y
                               q(X1 , . . . , Xv ) = α ·          ℓj (Xj ) · T (X1 , . . . , Xv ),
                                                            j=1

where:
   • α = eq(w
         e [<i] , r[<i] ) is a scalar constant

   • ℓj (Xj ) = eq(we i+j−1 , Xj ) = wi+j−1 · Xj + (1 − wi+j−1 )(1 − Xj ) are linear polynomials

   • T (X1 , . . . , Xv ) = x′ eq(w
                               e [>i+v−1] , x′ ) · k pk (r[<i] , X1 , . . . , Xv , x′ )
                           P                      Q




                                                               42
C.5.2     Space-efficient computation via k-way decomposition
Let s = ℓ − i − v + 1 be the
                          Pksuffix length. We partition the suffix bits into k parts of roughly equal length
sj ≈ s/k for j ∈ [k], with j=1 sj = s. This allows us to rewrite T as a k-fold iterated sum:
                                                   X
                            T (X1 , . . . , Xv ) =     e range1 , x′1 )
                                                       eq(w
                                                      x′1 ∈{0,1}s1
                                                           X
                                                                      e range2 , x′2 )
                                                                      eq(w
                                                     x′2 ∈{0,1}s2

                                                           ..
                                                            .
                                                           X
                                                                       e rangek , x′k )
                                                                       eq(w
                                                     x′k ∈{0,1}sk
                                                     d
                                                     Y
                                                 ·         pj (r[<i] , X1 , . . . , Xv , x′1 , . . . , x′k ),
                                                     j=1

where rangej denotes the j-th partition of suffix bits.
   The crucial insight is that we can evaluate this nested sum in a streaming fashion that uses only O(2s/k )
space. We iterate through all tuples (x′1 , . . . , x′k ) in lexicographic order (with x′k changing most frequently),
maintaining only the necessary partial sums.

Algorithm: Streaming k-way evaluation.
   1. Precompute equality tables: For each of the k ranges, compute and store:
                                         e rangej , x′j ) : x′j ∈ {0, 1}sj }
                                        {eq(w                                              for j ∈ [k]

      Each table requires 2sj ≈ 2s/k space and can be computed using the standard streaming recurrence.
      Total space: O(k · 2s/k ) = O(2s/k ).
   2. Streaming accumulation: Process the nested sum from innermost to outermost. For each partial
      tuple (x′1 , . . . , x′j−1 ), we maintain a running sum over (x′j , . . . , x′k ). By processing in lexicographic
      order and immediately consuming each partial sum, we never store more than one partial sum per
      level simultaneously.


C.5.3     Proof of grid sufficiency
                                                            Qv
Lemma 13 (Grid sufficiency). Let q(X1 , . . . , Xv ) = α · j=1 ℓj (Xj ) · T (X1 , . . . , Xv ) where α ∈ F, each ℓj is
linear, and T has degree at most d in each variable. Then knowing T on the grid Udv suffices to compute all
round polynomials si , . . . , si+v−1 for the sum-check protocol.
Proof. In round i + j − 1 for j ∈ [1, v], the sum-check polynomial is:
                                                 X
                             si+j−1 (Xj ) =             q(ri , . . . , ri+j−2 , Xj , x′′ ).
                                                  x′′ ∈{0,1}v−j
                                                 Qj−1
This can be expressed as si+j−1 (Xj ) = α ·          t=1 ℓt (ri+t−1 ) · ℓj (Xj ) · tj (Xj ), where tj is obtained by:

   1. Binding the first j − 1 coordinates of T to (ri , . . . , ri+j−2 ) using Lagrange interpolation
   2. Summing the remaining v − j coordinates over Boolean values (i.e., summing evaluations at 0 and 1
      along each free coordinate)
Both operations preserve the property that tj is a degree-d univariate polynomial, which can be recovered
from its evaluations on Ud . Multiplying by the linear polynomial ℓj (Xj ) gives the full round polynomial
si+j−1 on Ud ; the protocol message is then its restriction to U
                                                               cd , with the verifier reconstructing si+j−1 (0)
from Ci+j−2 − si+j−1 (1).


                                                                  43
                                    Equality-polynomial window handling

Inputs: Window size v, degree bound d, grid Ud = {∞, 0, 1, . . . , d − 1}, U
                                                                           cd = Ud \ {0}.
                                               Qd
Goal: Compute sum-check for g(X) = eq(w,
                                     e     X) · k=1 pk (X) over rounds [i, i + v − 1].

                                       e [>i+v−1] , x′ )}x′ via k-way streaming.
1. Precompute suffix weights: Compute {eq(w

2. Compute T on Udv : For each x′ ∈ {0, 1}ℓ−i−v+1 :
                                                         Qd
(a) Use multiproduct evaluation (Section 4) to compute k=1 pk (r[<i] , β, x′ ) for all β ∈ Udv .
                                 e [>i+v−1] , x′ ) · k pk (r[<i] , β, x′ ).
                                                    Q
(b) Accumulate: T (β) ← T (β) + eq(w

3. Extract round polynomials: For round j ∈ [1, v]:
(a) Contract bound variables (X1 , . . . , Xj−1 ) to (ri , . . . , ri+j−2 ) via Lagrange.
(b) Sum free variables (Xj+1 , . . . , Xv ) over Boolean values (equivalently, evaluate each free coordinate at 0
and 1 and add).
                       Qj−1
(c) Form sj (Xj ) = α · t=1 ℓt (ri+t−1 ) · ℓj (Xj ) · tj (Xj ).
(d) Restrict sj to U
                   cd for the transmitted message; the verifier reconstructs the omitted value sj (0) from
Ci+j−2 − sj (1).


         Figure 8: Complete algorithm for handling equality polynomials in windowed sum-check.


C.5.4   Detailed cost analysis
                                                                              e QX) · dk=1 pk (X) using
                                                                                       Q
Lemma 14 (Detailed marginal cost). When computing sum-check for g(X) = eq(w,
windows of size v with k-way decomposition, the additional cost beyond computing k pk (X) is:
   • Time:
        – Suffix weight computation: O(2s ) field operations where s = ℓ − i − v + 1
        – k-way table/setup overhead: O(k 2s/k ) operations
        – Window linear factors: (d + 1)v small-by-big multiplications per window
   • Space: O(2s/k ) = O(M 1/k ) for suffix weight storage
The dominant multiproduct evaluation cost remains Θ((d + 1)v ) rather than increasing to Θ((d + 2)v ).
                                                                                              s
Proof. The suffix weight computation uses standard equality-evaluation recurrences
                                                                               P and costs O(2 ) field
                                                                 sj
operations. With k-way decomposition, we store k tables of size 2 each, where j sj = s and sj ≈ s/k.
Thus total space is j 2sj ≈ k · 2s/k = O(2s/k ).
                   P
   Generating the k equality tables contributes at most
                                                           
                                Xk                   k
                                                     X
                                     sj +1
                                   (2      − 2) = O    2 j  = O(k 2s/k ),
                                                         s

                                    j=1                     j=1

which is lower order than the dominant suffix-streaming work.
   The multiproduct evaluation for each suffix tuple uses the same (d + 1)v grid as without equality factors.
The only additional per-window multiplications are: (1) scaling accumulated sums by precomputed equality
weights (precomputation avoids recomputing weights but does not eliminate these multiplications), and (2)
multiplying by linear factors ℓj when extracting round polynomials, which requires (d + 1)v small-by-big
multiplications.


                                                           44
C.5.5    Intra-window prover algorithm
The statement in Figure 2 to “Run LinearTimeSC with qt ” is a conceptual simplification. In practice, the
prover does not materialize the coefficients of qt . Instead, it performs an equivalent set of operations directly
on the evaluation grid computed by MultiProductEval. This subsection details this process.

Representation. The window polynomial qt (X1 , . . . , Xωt ) is stored as a grid of (d + 1)ωt field elements,
representing its evaluations on the grid Udωt , where we define Ud := {∞, 0, 1, . . . , d − 1}. All intra-window
operations are performed on this grid, typically stored as a flat array in row-major order.

Sum-check on the Grid. Emulating the sum-check protocol on qt for rounds j = 1, . . . , ωt involves two
main steps per round, mirroring the logic of LinearTimeSC but adapted for the evaluation representation.

Round Polynomial Computation. For the current round j, the prover must compute the univariate
polynomial sj (Xj ) by summing qt over the Boolean hypercube of the remaining free variables Xj+1 , . . . , Xωt .
This is implemented as a series of grid reductions. To sum out a variable Xk (for k > j), the prover collapses
the corresponding axis of the grid. This operation proceeds slice-by-slice: for each univariate     P slice f (Xk )
along that axis (represented by its d + 1 evaluations on Ud ), the prover computes the sum b∈{0,1} f (b) =
f (0)+f (1). Since the values f (0) and f (1) are directly available in the evaluation grid for Ud , this summation
is a simple addition. This process is repeated for each free variable until only the axis corresponding to Xj
remains, which now holds the evaluations of sj (Xj ) on Ud .

Challenge Binding. After the verifier sends the challenge rj ∈ F, the prover binds the variable Xj to this
value. This corresponds to collapsing the current axis of the grid. For each slice along this axis (which now
represents a univariate restriction of the currently bound window polynomial), the prover evaluates it at the
point rj using Lagrange interpolation from the known values on Ud . The result is a new, smaller grid for
the polynomial qt (r1 , . . . , rj , Xj+1 , . . . , Xωt ), whose dimensionality is one less than the previous grid. This
prepares the state for the next round within the window.

C.5.6    Transition to the Final Prover
When the windowing schedule dictates a switch to the final, non-windowed prover (conceptually, LinearTimeSC ),
it is crucial to initialize this prover in the correct state. The new prover must behave as if it had been running
from the start, having already processed challenges r1 , . . . , rj ′ −1 , where j ′ is the round of the switch. A naive
start would be incorrect.
     An effective implementation strategy to correctly transfer state is to “fast-forward” a fresh instance of
the linear-time prover, via a final streaming pass. The process is as follows:
   1. Instantiate: A fresh instance of the LinearTimeSC prover is created, initialized with the original streams
      over the full {0, 1}ℓ hypercube.
   2. Populate Caches: The prover’s first step is run, which populates its internal evaluation tables (the
              (0)
      arrays Pk in Figure 4).
   3. Replay History: The prover then iteratively applies every historical challenge, from r1 up to rj ′ −1 .
                                                                                           (t)     (t−1)
      For each t = 1, . . . , j ′ − 1, it uses its update procedure to compute the tables Pk from Pk     and the
      challenge rt .
                                                                                                                  (j ′ −1)
   4. State Transfer: After all j ′ − 1 challenges have been processed, the resulting evaluation tables Pk
      represent the correct state. These tables are transferred to the main prover, which will use them to
      continue the protocol for rounds j ′ , . . . , ℓ.

This fast-forwarding procedure ensures that the final phase of the protocol begins with the correct partial
evaluations.



                                                          45
D     Details of the high-degree polynomial product
This appendix provides additional details for the univariate extrapolation routine used inside MultiProductEvalv,d ,
which were too technical for the main body.

D.1     Univariate extrapolation
We first provide the technical details for the optimized univariate extrapolation procedure, UniExtrap, which
is central to the performance of our high-degree polynomial product algorithm. The goal is to compute the
evaluations of a degree-k polynomial p(x) at points in Uh given its evaluations at Uk , for h > k. Let ek be the
vector of evaluations of p(x) on Uk . Each extrapolated value in eh can be computed as a linear combination
of the values in ek .

Vandermonde matrix formulation. We consider first a naive solution. Let the coefficients of this linear
combination be computed using Vandermonde matrices in the following manner. Let Vn be the Vandermonde
matrix of size (n + 1) × (n + 1) over Un = {∞, 0, 1, . . . , n − 1}:
                                                                             
                                   0    0       0               0    ···   1
                                 1     0       0               0    ···   0  
                                                   2              3         n
                                                                             
                                 1     1       1              1     ···  1   
                                                   2              3         n
                                                                             
                                 1
                            Vn =       2       2              2     ···  2   
                                                   2              3         n
                                                                              
                                 1
                                       3       3              3     ···  3   
                                                                              
                                  ..   ..       ..             ..   ..    .
                                                                           .. 
                                 .      .        .              .      .     
                                   1   n−1     (n − 1)2     (n − 1)3   ···   (n − 1)n

which maps a vector of coefficients of a degree-n polynomial to its evaluations at Un . Its inverse Vn−1 maps
the evaluations of a degree-n polynomial to its coefficients. The extrapolated evaluations eh can be computed
from ek using the formula
                                               eh = Vh,k Vk−1 ek ,
where Vh,k is the (h + 1) × (k + 1) matrix formed by taking the first k + 1 columns of Vh . The right matrix
Vk−1 maps the evaluations of the degree-k polynomial to its coefficients, and the left matrix Vh,k maps
these coefficients to evaluations at points in Uh . Together, these can be preprocessed to a single matrix
M = Vh,k Vk−1 of size (h + 1) × (k + 1). The first k + 1 rows of this matrix are the identity matrix, as the
first k + 1 values of eh are the same as those of ek .

Coefficient growth and cost of the naive approach. In the subsequent rows of M , all of the entries
are non-zero and the entries grow in magnitude further down the rows. As an example of how these entries
grow, row k + 2 of V16 V8−1 is
                                   [40320, −1, 8, −28, 56, −70, 56, −28, 8]
while row 2k is
                           [259459200, −3432, 25740, −83160, 150150, −163800, . . .]
Naively, this extrapolation requires (k + 1) sb multiplications and k additions per extrapolated value. For
the recursive structure of MultiProductEval, this would imply O(d2 log d) sb operations in total to compute
the product of d linear polynomials, which is concretely worse than the naive approach unless sb operations
were cheaper than bb by a factor of at least log d.

Reusing computations via shifted evaluations. However, we observe that it is possible to do signif-
icantly better by reusing work across the k extrapolated values, after which it is even possible to optimize




                                                       46
away many of the sb multiplications in favor of additions. Consider the more manageable example of V8 V4−1 .
                                                                          
                                                   1    0     0    0     0
                                                 0     1     0    0     0
                                                                          
                                                 0     0     1    0     0
                                                                          
                                                 0     0     0    1     0
                              M := V8 V4−1 = 
                                                                          
                                                 0     0     0    0     1.
                                                 24 −1 4 −6 4 
                                                                          
                                                120 −4 15 −20 10
                                                                          
                                                360 −10 36 −45 20
                                                 840 −20 70 −84 35

Ignoring the contribution of the evaluation at ∞, the linear combination in the first row can be computed
using just 6 additions. If every row had values this small, they would be similarly easy to compute, and it
would be possible to potentially share work across the rows. However, the later rows require significantly
more work.
    Put differently, computing p(k) from evaluations of p(x) for all x ∈ Uk is easy while computing p(k + c)
from evaluations of p(x) at these points is more expensive, and rapidly gets more expensive, to a point, as
c increases. Our key insight is that computing p(k + c) can be expressed as the problem of computing qc (k)
where qc (k) := p(k + c). This means that it is possible to compute p(k + c) from evaluations of p(x) at the
points (∞, c, c + 1, . . . , c + k − 1) efficiently. Additionally, if we have already extended p from Uk to Uc+k ,
then we have the evaluations required to compute qc (k).
    This is best illustrated with the example of k = 4. To extrapolate from U4 to U8 , we can compute the
new evaluations one by one. In the lower-triangular matrix below, the jth entry of e8 can be computed by
multiplying the jth row of this matrix by the partially filled vector of evaluations, e8 .
                                                                                  
                                       1     0     0    0    0      0    0 0 0
                                     0      1     0    0    0      0    0 0 0
                                                                                  
                                     0      0     1    0    0      0    0 0 0
                                                                                  
                                     0      0     0    1    0      0    0 0 0
                                                                                  
                                     0      0     0    0    1      0    0 0 0
                                                                                  .
                                     24 −1 4 −6 4                  0    0   0   0 
                                                                                  
                                     24 0 −1 4 −6 4                     0 0 0
                                                                                  
                                     24 0         0 −1 4 −6 4 0 0
                                      24 0         0    0 −1 4 −6 4 0

From this structure, it is immediately clear that it is possible to reuse work across rows and that the number
of additions required to compute each row is small. The low-level optimizations here require finding minimal
multi-addition chains for the small integer coefficients. We provide explicit, optimized procedures for this
computation in our implementation.

D.2     Multivariate extrapolation
We first recall the content of the multivariate extrapolation algorithm from the main body (Procedure 2).
Given evaluations on the Boolean grid Ukv of a v-variate polynomial p with per-variable degree at most k,
the task is to extend these evaluations to the larger grid Uhv for some h > k. The algorithm uses the standard
“passes” view that reduces multivariate extrapolation to a sequence of univariate extrapolations applied to
axis-aligned slices.
   In pass j ∈ [v], we extrapolate along the j-th coordinate for all (v−1)-dimensional slices defined by the
remaining coordinates. At the start of pass j, the grid is Uhj−1 × Ukv−j+1 . Extrapolating along the j-th
coordinate requires
                                          Nj = (h+1) j−1 (k+1) v−j
independent univariate calls. After completing pass j the grid becomes Uhj × Ukv−j . Summing over all passes,




                                                       47
the total number of univariate extrapolations is
                                            v
                                            X                                     (h+1)v − (k+1)v
                        Ntot (k, v, h) =          (h+1) j−1 (k+1) v−j =                           .          (10)
                                            j=1
                                                                                       h−k

   Let Cuni (k, h) denote the online cost of one univariate extrapolation from degree k to h using the shifted-
evaluation recurrence described above, counting sb operations and field additions. In the doubling regime
used in the product recursion (h ∈ {2k, 2k + 1}), the recurrence has k terms applied to each of h − k = Θ(k)
new values, giving
                                              Cuni (k, h) = Θ(k 2 ).                                       (11)
   Therefore, the online cost of multivariate extrapolation is
                                     Cextrap (k, v, h) = Ntot (k, v, h) · Cuni (k, h),                       (12)
entirely in sb operations and field additions, with zero bb multiplications.
    For the doubling regime that arises inside our product recursion (set k = ⌊d/2⌋, h = d), we have
Ntot (k, v, h) = Θv (k v−1 ) (with a constant depending on v), and Cuni (k, h) = Θ(k 2 ). Hence one multivariate
extrapolation costs Θv (k v+1 ), and the pair of extrapolations at a product node costs Θv (dv+1 ) in sb/a.

D.3     Multivariate product costs
                                                                                                    Qd
We now analyze the cost of MultiProductEvalv,d which computes, in evaluation form, the product g = i=1 pi
of d multilinear polynomials given by their values on U1v = {0, 1}v . Each internal node of the divide-and-
conquer recursion multiplies two degree-⌊d/2⌋ and degree-⌈d/2⌉ partial products after extrapolating them
to the common grid Udv .

Big-by-big multiplications.          Counting only pointwise products on U·v , the cost obeys the recurrence
                        Av (1) = 0,        Av (d) = Av (⌊d/2⌋) + Av (⌈d/2⌉) + (d+1)v .
Unrolling by recursion depth yields the bounds
                        ⌈log2 d⌉−1                                       ⌈log2 d⌉−1
                           X                                                X
                                      t      t      v
                                     2 (⌊d/2 ⌋+1)        ≤ Av (d) ≤                   2t (⌈d/2t ⌉+1)v .
                           t=0                                              t=0
                    v                                           m
Hence Av (d) = Θ(d ) for all fixed v ≥ 2. When d = 2                 the exact expression is
                                                 m−1
                                                 X
                                 Av (2m ) =             2t (2m−t +1)v                                        (13)
                                                 t=0
                                                       m−1
                                                       X                              
                                            = 2mv             2t(1−v) · 1 + O(2−(m−t) ) ,                    (14)
                                                        t=0

which converges to a constant factor cv := 1/(1 − 21−v ) as m → ∞. For v = 1 one recovers the exact
univariate form A1 (d) = d ⌈log2 d⌉ + 2d − 2⌈log2 d⌉ − 1.

Small-by-big multiplications and additions. Let Sv (d) denote the total cost in sb operations and
additions. At a node with degree d, we perform two extrapolations to Udv from k = ⌊d/2⌋ and k ′ = ⌈d/2⌉.
Using (12), each extrapolation costs Θv (dv+1 ) in the doubling regime, so the per-node lower-order work is
Θv (dv+1 ). The resulting recurrence
                        Sv (1) = 0,         Sv (d) = Sv (⌊d/2⌋) + Sv (⌈d/2⌉) + Θ(dv+1 )
solves to Sv (d) = Θ(dv+1 ) for all fixed v ≥ 1. All these costs are in sb and additions; no new bb are introduced
by extrapolation.
    We thus summarize the cost of MultiProductEvalv,d as follows. This gives more details than the same
statements in the main body.


                                                                48
Lemma 15 (Product cost summary). For fixed v ≥ 2 and all d ≥ 1, the algorithm MultiProductEvalv,d uses
Av (d) = Θ(dv ) big-by-big multiplications and Sv (d) = Θ(dv+1 ) small-by-big operations plus additions. For
v = 1, the big-by-big count is A1 (d) = d ⌈log2 d⌉+2d−2⌈log2 d⌉ −1 and the lower-order work is S1 (d) = Θ(d2 ).
    These results follow from the fact that at each level of the recursion, the per-node extrapolation cost
is Θ(dv+1 ) (because each univariate extrapolation from degree k to 2k costs Θ(k 2 ) operations), and the
level-sum decays geometrically (ratio 1/2v ), so the root level dominates.


E     Integration with Jolt
This appendix explains how the techniques in this paper instantiate inside the current Jolt prover [2]. We
focus on the two integration points used in our evaluation: (i) Spartan outer sum-check, and (ii) instruction
RA (read-access) virtualization in Shout.

E.1    Spartan outer sum-check
In the standard Spartan formulation [49], one proves the R1CS relation
                                                  (A · Z) ◦ (B · Z) = C · Z,

where A, B, C ∈ Fn×m are public matrices, x ∈ Fk is the public input, v ∈ Fm−k−1 is the private witness,
and Z = (1, x, v). The first Spartan sum-check is applied to
                                                                       
                                G(X) := eq(w,
                                         e    X) · A(X) · B(X) − C(X) ,
and proves
                                                         X
                                                                  G(x) = 0.
                                                       x∈{0,1}ℓ

Here w ∈ Fℓ is a random verifier challenge vector, and A, B, C are multilinear extensions of A · Z, B · Z, and
C · Z, respectively.
    In Jolt, Z encodes the execution trace, while A, B, C encode the VM constraints (together with lookup
and read-write checking subprotocols). Operationally, the prover computes A · Z, B · Z, and C · Z from the
trace; many coordinates are zero/one and, more generally, small signed integers. This is exactly the structure
we exploit.
    Round-by-round, the prover message has the standard form
                                            si (X) = eq(w[≤i] , (r[<i] , X)) · ti (X),
                              X
                                         eq(w[>i] , x′ ) A(r[<i] , X, x′ )B(r[<i] , X, x′ ) − C(r[<i] , X, x′ ) .
                                                                                                               
               ti (X) =
                          x′ ∈{0,1}ℓ−i

This is the standard outer sum-check equation used by the baseline ablation.

Univariate-skip variant in Jolt. In the current Jolt outer instance, the uniform constraint table has 19
constraints. Applying univariate skip, we partition these constraints as C = Csmall ⊔ Crem , with |Csmall | = 10
and |Crem | = 9. The first set is proved via one univariate-skip round over a size-10 domain, followed by
ordinary low-degree remainder rounds for the residual variables.
   Write d = |Csmall | − 1 = 9, and let z be the univariate first-round variable. The first-round message is
built from                            X
                                        ω(x′ ) Asmall (z, x′ ) B small (z, x′ ) − C small (z, x′ ) ,
                                                                                                  
                   q(z) = ωpack (z) ·
                                             x′

where ωpack (z) is the packed equality factor on the skipped constraint coordinate and ω(x′ ) is the folded
equality weight on the remaining variables; under this parameterization, deg q ≤ 3d = 27. After the verifier
samples the first-round challenge, the protocol continues with standard low-degree rounds (including the
|Crem | = 9 constraint remainder).


                                                                  49
Why this split helps. The split is not arbitrary: we place in Csmall the constraints whose arithmetic
profile is most “small-value friendly” (many Boolean/near-Boolean factors and low absolute value ( ∼ 64-bit
integers) in the linear forms). This maximizes the work that benefits from our small-value multiplication
and delayed reduction optimizations. Constraints with wider intermediate magnitudes are left in Crem , where
they are handled in the regular remainder rounds.

Why this matters for the benchmarks. This stage is exactly what is measured in Figure 3 and tables 8
to 10. The linear-space variants materialize large bound buffers in the remainder, while streaming variants
trade runtime for lower peak memory.

E.2     Instruction RA virtualization in Shout
For proving correctness of instruction execution, Jolt uses the Shout lookup argument to perform one lookup
per cycle into a structured table of size 2128 . In this lookup argument, the prover needs a read-address
selector ra(k,
         e     j): for each cycle j, it indicates which lookup-table row k was accessed. Since the instruction
lookup address space is very large (K = 2128 in our setting), committing to a monolithic ra            e is expensive.
The protocol therefore virtualizes this selector and commits only to smaller one-hot components.
    Concretely, the prover splits the address into N blocks, k = (k (0) , . . . , k (N −1) ), and writes
                                                               N
                                                               Y −1
                                                 ra(k,
                                                 e     j) =           e (i) (k (i) , j).
                                                                      ra
                                                                i=0

The instruction read-checking and RAF-evaluation identities (see [51]) consume ra   e (i) as virtual polynomials
and output claims
                                     e (i) (r(i) , rcyc ) for i = 0, . . . , N − 1.
                                αi = ra
The RA virtualization sum-check is the bridge that proves these claims from committed data.
    Each virtual factor ra       e (i) is itself represented as a product of d committed one-hot chunk polynomials,
ra
e i,1 , . . . , ra
                e i,d , so the identity proved is

                                                  X                          d
                                                                             Y
                                     αi =                    e cyc , j) ·
                                                             eq(r                  ra
                                                                                   e i,t (ri,t , j).
                                              j∈{0,1}log T                   t=1

To prove all N claims in one shot, Jolt batches them with a random challenge γ:
                            N
                            X −1                  X                         N
                                                                            X −1         d
                                                                                         Y
                                   γ i αi =                  e cyc , j) ·
                                                             eq(r                   γi         ra
                                                                                               e i,t (ri,t , j).
                             i=0              j∈{0,1}log T                   i=0         t=1

At a high level, this certifies that the virtual address selectors used by the instruction-lookup argument are
exactly the tensor/product composition of the committed one-hot chunks.

Tunable parameters.         Let κ = log2 K be the address bit-width and let b be the bit-width per committed
chunk. Then
                                           κ/N
                                          d=   ,    degsumcheck = d + 1.
                                             b
Thus N and d are coupled tuning knobs: increasing N by a factor of 2 decreases d (and the degree) by a
factor of 2, and vice versa, while the total number of committed chunk polynomials N · d = κ/b stays fixed.
In our benchmarks (κ = 128, b = 4), this gives
                            N = 8 : d = 4, deg = 5,                N = 4 : d = 8, deg = 9,
                            N = 2 : d = 16, deg = 17,                  N = 1 : d = 32, deg = 33.

Optimized vs naive kernels. The RA prover can evaluate this product either with a naive O(d2 ) inter-
polation/extrapolation path or with the optimized high-degree product kernel used in our implementation
from Section 4. This is exactly the comparison reported in Table 12.


                                                                 50
On the scope of our optimizations. Jolt contains additional sum-check instances beyond these two
integration points. This appendix intentionally documents only the two instances used in the paper’s main
benchmark claims, and matches the current Jolt implementation.


F     Why large fields?
In this section, we discuss why the sum-check protocol needs to operate over large fields (with cardinality
at least 2128 ) for non-interactive security (after applying the Fiat-Shamir transformation). More precisely,
this means that the sum-check challenges r1 , . . . , rℓ from the verifier need to be chosen over this large field,
even if the initial polynomial evaluations may be small. This applies especially to the extension field setting,
where one might be tempted to work fully over the small base field.
    Indeed, the core of the problem is that in the non-interactive setting, one cannot apply either sequential
or parallel repetition to boost soundness. Although such techniques can boost soundness in the interactive
setting, for sum-check-based SNARKs they fail to do so when combined with the Fiat-Shamir transforma-
tion [28] to render the protocol non-interactive (at least, not without major performance overheads).
    The case of sequential repetition is widely known. In particular, given a protocol with one or more rounds
and 1/poly(λ) soundness, repeating the protocol for any k = poly(λ) times and applying Fiat-Shamir results
in a completely insecure non-interactive argument. This is because an adversary against the Fiat-Shamired
version can simply guess the “bad” challenge for the first repetition via varying the first message, then do
the same for the second repetition via varying the first message of the second repetition, and so on. This is
referred to as a “grinding attack” on the Fiat-Shamired protocol.
    Grinding attacks are also effective when the Fiat-Shamir transformation is applied to the parallel (rather
than sequential) repetition of a multi-round protocol, unless the number of repetitions is very big. Specifically,
when applying parallel repetition followed by Fiat-Shamir to an ℓ-round interactive protocol, ℓ · k repetitions
are necessary to amplify λ/k bits of security to λ bits of security (i.e., there is an attack demonstrating that
this security bound is tight [6].14 ).
    In the context of the sum-check protocol, this results in O(nk log n) base field operations for the prover,
which is typically worse than the linear-time algorithm (Procedure 4) that achieves O(nk 2 ) base field opera-
tions. Indeed, in practice, we have k ≤ 4 (i.e. 64-bit inside BN254, or 32-bit subfield inside 128-bit extension
fields) while log n ≥ 20.


G      Cycle counts for Montgomery multiplication
An informal but concrete anchor for the claim that a 256-bit field multiplication costs on the order of 50–
100 cycles on modern x86 64 comes from a public benchmark: a hand-tuned (non-constant-time) secp256k1
implementation reports a 256-bit Montgomery multiplication in 49 cycles/op on an Intel i7-6700 (Skylake)
and 93 cycles/op on an Intel i3-2328M (Sandy Bridge) [66]. At 4 GHz, 50–100 cycles corresponds to roughly
12.5–25 ns.
    The architectural reason these numbers are plausible is that modern x86 cores provide instructions
intended for multi-precision arithmetic. In particular, MULX (BMI2) performs a 64 × 64 → 128 multiply
without touching flags, and the ADX extension provides ADCX and ADOX, which maintain independent carry
chains. This permits overlap of partial products and reductions in 4×64-bit (256-bit) Montgomery kernels,
shortening dependency chains compared to classic MUL/ADC-based code [35, 15, 19, 29]. As an additional data
point, a 384-bit Montgomery multiplication implemented in x86 64 assembly and using these instructions
is reported at about 29.576 ns on an Intel i7-7700K, i.e., about 124–133 cycles at 4.2–4.5 GHz, which is
consistent with a well-optimized 256-bit kernel being cheaper [46].




  14 See https://a16zcrypto.com/posts/article/17-misconceptions-about-snarks/#section-13 for an exposition of this

attack.


                                                        51
