              Succinct Shortness Check Under a Few Kilobytes
                   via Tensor Train Random Projections

                                   Zhiyuan Geng1 and Maxime Plançon2
                                          1
                                                  University of Edinburgh, UK
                                              2
                                                   Input Output, Switzerland


      Abstract. Range proofs are a fundamental building block of lattice-based proof systems. Existing ap-
      proaches relying on standard Johnson-Lindenstrauss (JL) struggle to provide succinctness: unstructured
      JL incurs linear verifier complexity, while structured JL introduced in RoK and Roll [ASIACRYPT’25]
      produce large projection vectors that need to be sent in costly committed form. For a witness of di-
      mension m and a security parameter λ, the JL projection vector is Opλq, but the projection matrix
                                                              2
      is Opλmq. Structured JL can be represented in Opρλ  r     q, but the resulting projection length grows to
      Opm{ρq for any trade-off parameter ρ ą 1.
       r
           In this paper, we introduce Tensor Train Random Projection (TTRP) to lattice-based cryptography,
      offering a “best of both world” structured JL variant. The Tensor Train (TT) matrix representation
      drops to Opλq,
                 r     while maintaining the projection vector at Opλq.
            We show that TTRP can be seamlessly integrated into proof systems by linearizing the well-
      formedness of the projection with the sum-check protocol. Concretely, using TTRP + sum-check as
      a drop-in replacement for existing range proof techniques yields an approximate shortness check with
      Opλ log mploglog mq2 q verifier complexity and proof size around 4 KB for relevant parameter settings.

      Keywords: Lattices · Tensor Train · Approximate Range Proofs


1   Introduction
At the core of lattice-based succinct arguments is an opening proof of an Ajtai commitment [Ajt96],
i.e a proof of knowledge of a witness w P Rm such that
                                                      Aw “ t mod q                                                (1)
                                                      }w} ă B,                                                    (2)
where R :“ ZrXs{pf pXqq is a cyclotomic polynomial ring and A is a uniformly random matrix over
Rq :“ R{qR. In particular, it is not enough to prove that w satisfies the linear constraint eq. (1),
one also needs to convince the verifier that the witness is short.
     However, constructing shortness proofs and extracting the corresponding witness are notoriously
difficult. Typically, the extractor of a lattice-based proof system recovers a so-called relaxed opening
of an Ajtai commitment, consisting of a tuple pw,   s sq such that
                                                      Aw
                                                       s “ t mod q                                                (3)
                                                     }sw}
                                                       s ă B.                                                     (4)
Rather than proving both eqs. (1) and (2), the extractor obtains a w
                                                                   s with an unconstrained norm
satisfying t “ Aws mod q, and a factor s with a small operator norm such that sw s is small. The
extracted witness is typically constructed as a quotient
                                                    s :“ vs´1 mod q
                                                    w
where v P Rm is a vector with a slightly larger norm bound }v} ď B 1 than B and s :“ c ´ c1 is a
challenge difference.
    This extraction slack s is a consequence of a fundamental incompatibility between the following
desirable requirements on the challenge set C:
 2         Zhiyuan Geng and Maxime Plançon

  (i) For completeness, any challenge c P C must have a small operator norm so that our commitment
      scheme is linearly homomorphic w.r.t coefficients in C. In other words, cw must remain small
      enough that ct is a binding commitment.
 (ii) For soundness, any extraction slack factor s :“ c ´ c1 for c, c1 P C must have an inverse, and
      its inverse must have a small operator norm. Should there exist a small bound ϱ such that
      }s´1 }op ď ϱ, our extractor could extract w
                                                s with a mildly looser norm bound }w}s ď ϱB 1 .
(iii) For soundness, |C| “ 2Opλq where λ is the security parameter. Since our soundness arguments
      inherently rely on the Schwartz-Zippel Lemma, a sub-exponential-size challenge set would require
      costly repetitions.

 From a high level, [AL21] proved that, in cyclotomic rings, there exists no challenge set that satisfies
 (i), (ii) and (iii). The relaxed-opening strategy consists in choosing a challenge set C of polynomials
 with bounded coefficients that satisfy 1) and 3), but not 2). More precisely, we can only ensure that
 the inverse exists modulo q [LS18], but its operator norm can be arbitrarily large. The subtractive
 sets strategy explored in [ACK21,CLM23,KLNO24] consists in choosing a challenge set that satisfies
 (i) and (ii) of maximal size polypλq.
      While relaxed openings can be sufficient for constructing simple primitives such as signatures
 [Lyu09,Lyu12,DDLL13,DKL` 18], the existence of an extraction slack factor can be a source of
 inefficiency for more advanced primitives. For example, existing lattice-based Succinct ARguments
 of Knowledge (SNARKs), Polynomial Commitment Schemes (PCS) or folding schemes rely on
 recursive Reductions of Knowledge (RoK), where the operator norm of the extraction slack grows
 exponentially with the recursive depth. The prevailing strategy to bridge the gap between a relaxed
 opening and an exact solution to eqs. (1) and (2) is to attach a range proof 3 .
 Infinity norm proofs. Earlier constructions of linear-size proofs focused on infinity-norm proofs
 [YAZ` 19,BLS19,ESLL19,LNS21], i.e, proving claims of the form

                                                     }w}8 ď B8                                                    (5)

 for some infinity norm bound B8 . With respect to the coefficients of w over Z, the eq. (5) can
 be expressed as a polynomial and therefore proven with protocols relying on Schwartz-Zippel ar-
 guments. More recently, folding scheme constructions [NS26,BC25b,GLLO26,BC25a] adapted this
 infinity-norm proof strategy to the succinct setting. In those schemes, the polynomial relations en-
 coding eq. (5) are batched together and reduced to a single random polynomial evaluation via the
 sum-check protocol. With the exception of [BC25b], the polynomial encoding eq. (5) for all afore-
 mentioned linear and succinct proofs is of degree 2B8 ` 1, which corresponds to the range of the
 coefficients of the witness.
     With today’s tools, proving high-degree polynomial relations over lattices is expensive; therefore,
 the most efficient regime for these infinity-norm proofs is when B8 “ 14 . The consequence is that
 witnesses need to be decomposed to ternary coefficients and possibly re-committed in this form,
 which is a major source of inefficiency. Moreover, the infinity norm is less tightly controlled than the
 Euclidean norm during naturally occurring operations such as linear combinations, and therefore
 infinity norm proofs tend to yield worse concrete parameters than Euclidean norm proofs.
 Random projections and Euclidean norm proofs. First introduced in functional analysis,
 Johnson-Lindenstrauss [JL84] (JL) projections map a high-dimensional vector w to a smaller space
  3
      For succinct proofs with a recursive structure, the rigorous name should be range RoK.
  4
      Again, with the exception of LatticeFold+’s range proof [BC25b], though at the price of expensive double commit-
      ments.
                    Succinct Shortness Check Under a Few Kilobytes via Tensor Train Random Projections       3

via a linear transformation of the form p “ Jw. JL projections are widely adopted and studied in
machine learning [Ach03,BM01] as a dimensionality-reduction tool.
    In the context of lattice-based proofs, random projections were explored in the setting of amor-
tization [BL17], and fully connected to Johnson-Lindenstrauss projections in [GHL22]. Random
projections are philosophically radically different from Schwartz-Zippel-based infinity-norm proofs,
as they keep the geometric nature of the norm bound (instead of arithmetizing it as a polynomial)
and rely on a statistical test to distinguish long vectors from short vectors.
    At a high level, the idea is that with a witness vector w P Zm and a projection matrix J P Rkˆm
whose coefficients are drawn from N (here N is the centered Gaussian distribution of standard
deviation 1), the distribution of }Jw}2 follows a scaled chi-squared distribution with k degrees of
freedom concentrated around k}w}2 . For any vector w P Zm , there exist a lower bound γ1 and an
upper bound γ2 that only depend on a security parameter λ (or confidence parameter) and the
height k of the projection matrix such that
                                        ˆ                   ˙
                                                }Jw}
                                  Pr      γ1 ď ?       ď γ2 ě 1 ´ 2´λ .
                               JÐN kˆm           k}w}
Discretizing J to Zkˆm by sampling the coefficients from the distribution D such that Dp1q “
Dp´1q “ 1{4 and Dp0q “ 1{2, we obtain a compact projection vector p :“ Jw P Zk of small
dimension k “ Opλq that, intuitively, is small if and only if the original witness w is small.
    Wrapping up, to include a JL approximate range proof for a vector w such that }w} ď B in
a lattice-based proof system, the verifier generates a random matrix J with entries drawn from D,
and the prover sends the projection p together with a proof of well-formedness that p “ Jw. The
verifier checks that }p} ď γ2 B, which holds with overwhelming probability for an honest prover.
Conversely, the extractor knows that for all w P Zm , if }w} ě γγ21 B, then

                                          Pr    p}Jw} ď γ2 Bq ď 2´λ ,
                                       JÐDkˆm

thus achieving an approximate ℓ2 -norm proof with a slack factor γ2 B{γ
                                                                    B
                                                                        1
                                                                          “ γγ21 . For practical proof
                                                  a
systems [LNP22,BS23], the concrete slack factor is 128{30 » 2, yielding a tight ℓ2 -norm proof.
Random projections for succinct arguments. The challenge of a JL approximate range proof
is a k ˆm “ Opλmq ternary matrix, which means that schemes such as LaBRADOR [BS23] that use
straightforward JL projections suffer from a linear verifier5 . To patch this issue, [KLNO25,KLN` 26]
introduced so-called structured random projections. Their idea is to divide the witness into chunks
of a given length ℓ, and to use a single JL matrix to project each chunk individually. While this
technique does lower the verifier complexity to Opλℓq, several problems arise.
    First, the projection is now a vector p of m{ℓ projections, each of length Opλq, which is too
large to be sent in the clear. Their solution is to instead commit to p, which means that the prover
must now convince the verifier that p, sent in committed form, is small. The second problem is that
the optimal parameter ℓ chosen by RoKoko is Opλ2 q, making the overall verifier complexity at least
Opλ3 q per recursion.

1.1     Our contributions
In this paper, we introduce Tensor Train Random Projections (TTRP) to the design of lattice-based
proof systems. TTRP is the first random projection to simultaneously achieve the following three
properties:
5                                                                                ?
    We note that despite relying on JL projections,
                                             ?      Greyhound [NS24] achieves Opλ mq verifier complexity due to
    calling LaBRADOR on inputs of length Op mq
4        Zhiyuan Geng and Maxime Plançon

                                           r 6.
           (i) Succinct representation in Opλq
          (ii) Projection length linear in Opλq.
         (iii) Slack factor in polypλ, mq.

Our contributions can be divided in two parts.

Theoretical groundwork. While the properties of TTRP have been extensively studied by the
machine learning community, the statistical bounds in the settings relevant to the design of approx-
imate range proofs remained unexplored. We bridge this gap by showing that TTRP is a viable
approximate-isometry tool for lattice-based cryptography.
    First, we extend the study of TTRP to prime fields Zq to fit the native arithmetic of lattice-based
cryptography. We show that–much like standard JL projections–when working modulo some prime
q, the approximate-isometry guarantees of TTRP only hold for a bounded range of input norms. In
other words, there is a maximum norm for the witness w after which the statistical control on the
projection collapses.
    Second, we derive new ℓ2 -concentration bounds that yield practical slack factors for lattice-based
proof systems. Asymptotically, these concentration bounds ensure that TTRP satisfies

           (i) Succinct representation in Opλ log mploglog mq2 q “ Opλq.
                                                                   r
          (ii) Projection length in Opλq.
         (iii) Slack factor polypmq.

    Notably, we provide assumption-free bounds for TTRP with entries following the distribution
D. Schemes that rely on JL projections with entries following D adopt the heuristic assumption
that D is a Gaussian distribution, in which case the JL bounds are standard chi-square tail bounds.
In contrast, our analysis is generic to any distribution that is a linear combination of Rademacher
variables (i.e uniform over ´1, 1) and thus does not rely on any heuristic.

Approximate range RoK. We describe a norm check protocol Π TTRP that is a self-reduction
for a general Ajtai commitment polynomial relations. This protocol is an approximate norm-check
module in the sense that the extractor only needs relaxed witnesses to recover the input witness,
though with a norm bound multiplied by the slack factor of TTRP.
    This norm check RoK consists in following the JL blueprint, but relies on the sum-check pro-
tocol to linearise the well-formedness of the projection, drawing inspiration from recent works
[KLOT25,GLLO26,NS26,BC25b,KLN` 26]. As a self-RoK for general Ajtai commitment relations,
Π TTRP can be used as a highly efficient drop-in replacement for JL, unstructured JL, or sum-check
ternary proofs and serve as range proof module.
    To substantiate the broad applicability of our techniques, we provide examples of integration
to state-of-the-art lattice-based succinct arguments. More precisely, we use our protocol as a re-
placement of JL in LaBRADOR, thus achieving a „ 90, 000ˆ improvement in verifier complexity
at the cost of a „ 2 KB increase in proof size and a „ 29 ˆ increase in the slack factor (Table 1).
We substitute both the coarse and fine unstructured JL in RoKoko with our protocol, which allows
us to remove costly commitments to projection vectors, and reduce the verifier complexity of the
random projection by a factor Opλ2 { log2 mq. In particular, the bottleneck for verifier efficiency in
the resulting construction is now the shrink factor. Finally, we replace the sum-check based ternary
proofs in Cyclo with TTRP, thus removing expensive decompositions and extension commitments.
The resulting folding proof size drops by 30%.
6
    For asymptotics, we assume that m “ polypλq
                     Succinct Shortness Check Under a Few Kilobytes via Tensor Train Random Projections         5


            Range proof                     mφ         Proof Size     Slack Factor     Matrix Repr.
                                                         (KB)                             (MB)
                                                                        a
                                            227           1.84           128{30               6492
            JL (From LaBRADOR)                                          a
                                            230           1.89           128{30               51936

                                            227           3.90            „ 210                0.2
            TTRP (this paper)
                                            230           3.98            „ 210                0.6

Table 1. Comparison of range proof efficiency between standard JL (from LaBRADOR) and our Π TTRP protocol
(TTRP + sum-check linearization, fig. 1).



1.2     Technical overview
The foundational problem that we address in this paper is to find a class of projection matrices with
approximate-isometric properties and succinct representation. To understand the technical aspects
of our construction, let us first explore the naive approaches.
Naive approaches. A natural starting point is to consider a projection matrix where each row
is a tensor product of small JL vectors. Specifically, we assume that m “ dµ , and create for all
i P rks vectors vi “ µj“1 aj for independently distributed random vectors aj Ð Dd . For each
                       Â      piq                                                   piq

row of the resulting matrix vi , we can apply recursively the single-row JL bound and obtain a slack
factor of Opαµ q. Due to high correlation between the output coefficient of each row, the per-row
probability drops dramatically, requiring a prohibitive Ωpλ log mq repetitions to achieve λ bits of
statistical soundness.
    Another approach is to recursively apply the structured JL projection from [KLNO25]. More
precisely, the verifier would generate µ JL matrices J1 , . . . , Jµ and compute the projection p of w
as follows:
                                  p :“ J1 pJ2 b Ikd q ¨ ¨ ¨ pJµ b Ikdµ´1 qw7 .
The length ℓ of the JL projections must be at least kd, so that at each layer, the length of the
projected vector is reduced by a constant factor d. At each layer, the slack factor is multiplied by α,
thus this approach achieves a slack factor αµ “ Opmq. However, the representation of the projection
matrix is µk 2 d “ Opλ2 log mq, which is too large to be satisfactory for us. Both aforementioned
approaches are particular extreme cases of our TTRP approach.
Introduction to TTRP. The Tensor Train (TT) structure was first introduced in [Ose11] as a
numerical tool to represent high-dimensional data in a compact format. More recently, TTRP have
been developed as an efficient dimensionality-reduction tool for machine learning [RR21,RR20].
   A TT is a Kronecker product of so-called core tensors. Specifically, consider a 3-rd order tensor
M P Zc0 ˆdˆc1 . Our 3-rd order tensor M can be seen as a list of c0 ˆc1 matrix slices, and for all j P rds,
                                                                                                      1
we denote Mpjq the j-th matrix slice of M. Consider a second 3-rd order tensor M1 P Zc1 ˆd ˆc2 ,
where the first dimension c1 of M1 is identical to the 3-rd dimension of M. We define the Kronecker
product M b M1 as

                       @pi, jq P rds ˆ rd1 s,     M b M1 pi, jq “ Mpiq ¨ M1 pjq P Zc0 ˆc2 .                   (6)
                                                                                                          1
With words, the Kronecker product of M and M1 is the 3-rd order tensor of dimension Zc0 ˆpdˆd qˆc2
that is the tensor product of the vector of slices of M with the vector of slices of M1 . Generally,
7
    This projection strategy was recently explored in concurrent work [Osa26]
6      Zhiyuan Geng and Maxime Plançon

the TT of a list of µ cores M1 P Zc0 ˆdˆc1 , . . . , Mµ P Zcµ´1 ˆdˆcµ is
                                                                           µ
                            TTptMi uiPrµs q :“ M1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b Mµ P Zc0 ˆd ˆcµ .

At a high level, the idea of TTRP is to construct a projection matrix whose rows have a tensor
product structure for succinctness, but that carry more information than straightforward tensor
products of constant-size JL rows. Specifically, to ensure that a TT outputs a single row vector, we
enforce c0 “ cµ “ 1 and define the internal rank of the TT as c :“ c1 “ ¨ ¨ ¨ “ cµ´1 . This internal
rank intuitively plays the role of an internal repetition rate, allowing the final vector to carry more
information.
    TTRP is a random projection with a matrix whose rows are TT of independent lists of cores,
and is given by                               ´                      ¯
                                k                       pjq
                               fTTpµ,cq pwq :“ TTptMi uiPrµs qjPrks w.
Over the integers, TTRP satisfies the ℓ2 -approximate-isometry property, that is:
                                           }fTT pwq}22
                                                       P p1 ˘ ϵq
                                              }w}22
with high probability for some ϵ ą 0. Our modular ℓ8 concentration bound states that for any w
such that }w}8 ě B8 for some B8 ă q{4, we have

                                                            µ´1 k
                            „                 ȷ      ˆ            ˙
                                k          B8
                          Pr }fTTpµ,cq }8 ă µ    ď     1{2 ` c`1     .
                                            2                2

To achieve Opλq repetitions, we need 2µ´1
                                        c`1 “ Op1q, i.e c “ Oplog µq “ Oploglog mq thus achieving
Opλ log mploglog mq2 q representation for the projection matrix. Looking towards applications, we
extend these modular concentration bounds to the ℓ2 -norm, where the asymptotic bounds require
slightly worse parameters than in the ℓ8 -norm case. Specifically, since the projection coefficients
do not follow a Gaussian distribution, its Euclidean norm is not as concentrated as the chi-square
distribution of regular JL. Concretely, we obtain approximate-isometry concentration bounds in
ℓ2 -norm for k “ Opλq and c “ Oplog mq. The representation of this TTRP projection matrix is
asymptotically Opλ log3 mq P Opλq.
                              r
Proving TTRP. The random projection paradigm for approximate range proof is as follows. The
verifier sends a projection matrix, the prover computes the projection, and sends it to the verifier
together with a well-formedness argument.
    Drawing inspiration from [KLN` 26], we design a self-RoK for a general polynomnial relation for
Ajtai commitments. Specifically, we follow the JL approximate range proof framework, and use the
sum-check protocol to create a simple, succinct and cheap linearization proof for the well-formedness
                                                  m{φ
of the TTRP projection p P Zk of a vector w P Rq      over a power-of-two cyclotomic ring of degree
φ.

2   Preliminaries

Notation. rns :“ t1, 2, . . . , nu. We denote column vectors by bold lowercase letters, matrices by bold
uppercase letters and higher-order tensors by calligraphic uppercase letters (e.g., M P Zc1 ˆdˆc2 for
3rd-order tensor). For i P rds, we use Mpiq P Zc1 ˆc2 to denote the i-th slice of M. We define
an operator vecp¨q which flattens a matrix into a vector by vertically concatenating its columns.
We define Matp¨q which flattens a 3rd-order tensor into a matrix by horizontally concatenating its
matrix slices.
                   Succinct Shortness Check Under a Few Kilobytes via Tensor Train Random Projections        7

Kronecker Product (slices level). Let A P Zc1 ˆd1 ˆc2 and B P Zc2 ˆd2 ˆc3 . We define their Kronecker
product, denoted by A b B, as a new 3rd-order tensor C P Zc1 ˆpd1 ¨d2 qˆc3 . The matrix slices of C are
generated by the standard matrix multiplication of the respective component slices

                              Cpi, jq “ pA b Bqpi, jq :“ Apiq ¨ Bpjq P Zc1 ˆc3 ,

where pi, jq P rd1 s ˆ rd2 s is the multi-index.
                                             ȷ „ ȷȷ              „„
                     ““      ‰ “ ‰‰        12 56
Example. Let A “          1 2 3 4 P Z1ˆ2ˆ2 and B “   P Z2ˆ2ˆ2 , then we have
                                           34 78
                      „     „ ȷ        „ ȷ       „ ȷ        „ ȷȷ
                        “ ‰ 12 “ ‰ 56 “ ‰ 12 “ ‰ 56
                 AbB “ 12 ¨       12 ¨      34 ¨       34 ¨
                              34        78        34          78
                     “ 7 10 19 22 15 22 43 50 P Z1ˆ4ˆ2 .
                      ““   ‰“    ‰“     ‰“    ‰‰

and consequently, we have:

                              Mat pA b Bq “ 7 10 19 22 15 22 43 50 P Z1ˆ8 .
                                           “                      ‰

The Kronecker product for 3rd-order tensors and the Kronecker product for vectors has the following
mixed product similarity.
Fact 1. For any 3rd-order tensors A P Zc1 ˆd1 ˆc2 and B P Zc2 ˆd2 ˆc3 , it holds that:

                           MatpA b Bq “ MatpAq ¨ pId1 b MatpBqq P Zc1 ˆpc3 d1 d2 q                         (7)

where Id1 is the d1 ˆ d1 identity matrix.
Proof. By rewriting the right-hand side, we have
                                                                             »                        fi
                                                             MatpBq   0    ...                   0
                                       `“                ‰˘— 0
                                                           —        MatpBq . . .                 0   ffi
          MatpAq ¨ pId1 b MatpBqq “ Mat Ap1q . . . Apd1 q — .
                                                                                                     ffi
                                                                      ..   ..                    ..
                                                           – ..
                                                                                                     ffi
                                                                       .       .                  .  fl
                                                                           0         0   . . . MatpBq
                                                   `“                                  ‰˘
                                              “ Mat Ap1q ¨ MatpBq . . . Apd1 q ¨ MatpBq
                                              “ MatpA b Bq.

Rings. For a power of two φ and a positive integer q, let R and Rq denote the rings ZrXs{pX φ ` 1q
and Zq rXs{pX φ ` 1q, respectively. For a polynomial x P R, we denote by cfpxq its coefficient
vector in Zφ . We use σ´1 P AutpRq q – Zˆ   2φ to denote the automorphism σ´1 pXq “ X
                                                                                          ´1 . For

vectors, matrices, and tensors, σ´1 p¨q applies the automorphism entry-wise. We also write ¨ to
denote this automorphism operation for readability. We define a useful notation for the inverse
coefficient embedding of 3-order tensors.
Definition 1 (Inverse Coefficient Embedding). For a tensor M P Zcˆdˆφ , the inverse coeffi-
cient embedding cf ´1 maps the third mode of dimension φ to the polynomial ring R. It outputs a
tensor cf ´1 pMq P Rcˆdˆ1 , with its pi, j, 1q-th entry defined as
                                                                 φ´1
                                                                 ÿ
                                                                       Mpi, j, ℓ ` 1qX ℓ
                                `        ´1
                                                  ˘
                                    cf        pMq pi, j, 1q :“
                                                                 ℓ“0

for i P rcs and j P rds.
8      Zhiyuan Geng and Maxime Plançon

Norm. We define the norm of an element x P R as the ℓ2 -norm of its coefficient embedding, denoted
by }x} :“ }cfpxq}2 . This definition extends to a vector x P Rm as }x} :“ }cfpxq}2 , and to a matrix
W P Rmˆr as }W} :“ }cfpVecpWqq}2 .

2.1   Multilinear Extension and Sumchecks over Rings
Definition 2 (Multilinear Extension). Let V be an R-module. The multilinear extension of a
function f : t0, 1uℓ Ñ V is the unique ℓ-variate polynomial mlerf s : Rℓ Ñ V of individual degree 1
satisfying mlerf spzq “ f pzq for all z P t0, 1uℓ .
    For d “ 2ℓ , by identifying the index set rds with t0, 1uℓ , arrays indexed by d are extended
coordinate-wise over Rℓ . A vector w P Rd , a matrix W P Rdˆr , and a 3rd-order tensor M P
Rr1 ˆdˆr2 correspond to functions mapping t0, 1uℓ into the R-modules R, Rr , and Rr1 ˆr2 respec-
tively, yielding their coordinate-wise multilinear extensions mlerws, mlerWs, and mlerMs.

   We recall the basic sumcheck reduction of knowledge from [KLN` 26], but we leave the input
and output relation of the protocol implicit, as they will always be clear from the context.

Lemma 1 (Basic Sumcheck, adapted from [KLN` 26]). Let R be a non-trivial ring, N, M
be R-modules, C Ď R be a subset with invertible difference. Let g P N rx1 , . . . , xℓ s and t P M . Let
Φ : N Ñ M be an C-linear map. There exists a reduction of knowledge Π sc from a summation claim
                               ¨                                  ˛
                                      ÿ
                             Φ˝                gpx1 , . . . , xℓ q‚ “ t
                                       px1 ,...,xℓ qPt0,1uℓ

to an evaluation claim Φpgprqq “ v where r “ pr1 , . . . , rℓ q P C ℓ are the verifier’s random challenges.
The protocol is public-coin, has completeness error 0, has soundness error ď ℓdegpgq      |C| , where degpgq
denotes the maximal individual degree. The communication is bounded by ℓpdegpgq ` 1q elements in
M from the prover and ℓ challenges in C from the verifier.

Distributions. The distribution Dghl is defined as the Binp2, 12 q ´ 1, i.e., it is 0 with probability 1{2
and 1 (resp. ´1) with probability 1{4.

Lemma 2. For any fixed vector x P r´q{2, q{2sm , if }x}8 ě B, for any B ă q{4 then
                                    „                     ȷ
                                                        B     1
                               Pr m |xm, xy mod q| ă        ď .
                             mÐDghl                     2     2

Proof. Let i be an index of an entry in x with magnitude at least B. After choosing all but the i-th
entry in m, at most one of the three values t´1, 0, 1u yields |xm, xy mod q| ă B{2.

2.2   Hardness Assumption
We state the formulation of the lattice hardness assumption used in this paper.

Definition 3 (Module-SIS (MSIS) Assumption). Let λ be a security parameter and params “
pR, q, κ, m, B, Dq be parameterized by λ, where R is a ring, q P N is a modulus, B ą 0 is a norm
bound, and D is a probability distribution over Rκˆm
                                                   q   . The SISparams assumption states that, for any
PPT adversary A, the advantage function satisfies
                                        „                   ˇ            ȷ
                      sis                 Ax “ 0 pmod qq ˇˇ A Ð D
                  Advparams,A pλq :“ Pr                     ˇ x Ð ApAq ď neglpλq.
                                          0 ă }x}2 ď B
                   Succinct Shortness Check Under a Few Kilobytes via Tensor Train Random Projections           9

   Definition 3 captures the standard Module-SIS assumption when D is ś    the uniform distribution
                                                                             ν
over Rκˆm
       q   . It captures the vanishing SIS (vSIS) assumption     when m “    i“1 mi and D samples
matrices exhibiting a row-tensor structure A “ A1 ‚ ¨ ¨ ¨ ‚ Aν , where Ai P Rκˆm
                                                                             q
                                                                                 i for i P rνs and ‚

stands for row-wise Kronecker product.


2.3    Relations

SIS relation. We define the relation Ξ sis of the SIS problem:
                                     $`        ˘                   ,
                                     ’
                                     ’    A; x :                   /
                                                                   /
                                     &                             .
                            sis                   κˆm        m
                          Ξκ,m,B :“        A P Rq , x P R            .
                                     ’
                                     ’                             /
                                                                   /
                                           Ax “ t mod q ^ }x}2 ď B
                                     %                             -


Polynomial Map and Sumcheck Relations. Let B ă q{2 be the norm bound and A P Rκˆm      q be an
Ajtai commitment key. Let f : Rmr Ñ Rn be a polynomial map. We define the polynomial map
relation as follows:
                                   $`          ˘                                   ,
                                   ’
                                   ’ T; pW,  Sq   :                                /
                                                                                   /
                                   ’
                                   ’                                               /
                                                                                   /
                                            κˆr           mˆr                 rˆr .
                                      T   R     ,  W     R    , diagonal S   R   ,
                                   &
                   poly                 P   q          P                   P
                 Ξf,κ,n,m,r,B,ϱ :“                                                   .
                                   ’
                                   ’
                                   ’  }S}op ď ϱ   s.t.  }WS}2   ă B,               /
                                                                                   /
                                                                                   /
                                   ’
                                   %                                               /
                                                                                   -
                                      AW “ T mod q ^ f pWq “ 0 mod q

    Let m¨r “ 2ν for d ě 2. The sumcheck relation Ξ sum augments Ξ poly with n1 additional sumcheck
claims:
                               $`                                                          ,
                                              ˘     poly
                               ’
                               ’
                               & T; pW,   Sq    P Ξf,κ,n,m,r,B,ϱ :                         /
                                                                                           /
                                                                                           .
          sum
         Ξf,κ,n,n1 ,m,r,B,ϱ :“                  ÿ        `                  ˘                .
                               ’
                               ’  @i P rn1 s,         gi mlervecpWqs, vecpWq pzq “ 0 mod q /
                                                                                           /
                               %                    ν
                                                                                           -
                                                   zPt0,1u


   We say that a relation is relaxed (denoted by Ξ poly-rel or Ξ sum-rel ) if the slack parameter satisfies
ϱ ą 1. If ϱ is omitted, it is implicitly set to 1, in which case we assume without loss of generality
that S “ Ir .


3     Tensor Train Random Projection

The tensor train (TT) decomposition [Ose11] is a generalization of the singular value decomposition
                                                                                         µ
that can represent an µ-th order tensor M P Rdˆ¨¨¨ˆd (or equivalently, a vector m P Rd ) using only
Opc2 dµq parameters, where the parameter c bounds the structural complexity of the decomposition.
Informally, an arbitrary tensor M P Rdˆ¨¨¨ˆd of order µ is said to be represented in a TT-format with
internal rank c if its individual entries can be exactly expressed as a chain of matrix multiplications

                 @pi1 , . . . , iµ q P rdsµ ,   Mpi1 , i2 , . . . , iµ q “ M1 pi1 qM2 pi2 q ¨ ¨ ¨ Mµ piµ q,   (8)

where each Mn pin q is the in -th matrix slice of size cn´1 ˆ cn extracted from the n-th core tensor
Mn P Rcn´1 ˆdˆcn , n P rµs. Since the output of a TT is a c0 ˆ cµ matrix, we fix c0 “ cµ “ 1
so as to enforce the output to be a scalar, while the intermediate internal ranks are constant
10     Zhiyuan Geng and Maxime Plançon

c1 “ ¨ ¨ ¨ “ cµ´1 “ c8 . For algebraic convenience, we frequently employ an equivalent Kronecker
product formulation. Under the same parameter definitions, the TT-format for a vectorized tensor
        µ
m P Rd can be compactly given by

                                              m “ Mat pM1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b Mµ q .

   Building upon this tensorized structure, the tensor train random projection (TTRP) [RR20]
was introduced to efficiently reduce the dimensionality of high-order tensors isometrically. A TTRP
        µ
fTT : Rd Ñ Rk pdµ " kq, is defined component-wise for the j-th output coordinate as
                                    1      ´
                                              pjq
                                                               ¯
                   pfTT pxqqpjq :“ ? Mat M1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b Mpjq   µ   ¨ x, for j P rks,               (9)
                                     k
                               pjq
where each core tensor Mi , i P rµs is independently sampled with Gaussian9 [RR20] or Rademacher
[RR21] entries. The TTRP satisfies similar approximate-isometry properties as Johnson-Lindenstrauss
projections. More precisely, it acts as an expected isometry that preserves the Euclidean geometry
of the original high-dimensional space. Concretely, for any ϵ ą 0, the squared Euclidean norm of
the projected vector is tightly preserved within a bounded multiplicative distortion, satisfying

                                                }fTT pxq}22 “ p1 ˘ ϵq}x}22

with a certain high probability.

3.1   Adaptation to Modular Arithmetic
The usual definition of TTRP [RR20] cannot be directly applied to lattice-based cryptography, as
we work over discrete structures rather than the real numbers, and modulo a prime number q. To
adapt TTRP to our setting, we introduce two main modifications:
                                                            ?
 1. We eliminate the fractional normalization coefficient 1{ k in Eq.(9).
 2. The Gaussian (or Rademacher) distributions are replaced by Dghl .

Definition 4 (Tensor Train Random Projection (TTRP), adapted from [RR20]). Let
µ, c, d, φ ě 1 and m “ dµ be integers. The tensor train random projection of internal rank c ě 1 is
                           k
a randomized linear map fTTpµ,cq  : Zm Ñ Zk defined component-wise by
                    ´                  ¯pjq         ´                  ¯
                         k                            pjq
                        fTTpµ,cq pxq          :“ Mat M1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b Mpjq
                                                                   µ     ¨ x,   for j P rks,              (10)

         pjq                   pjq                                      pjq
where M1 P Z1ˆdˆc , Mi P Zcˆdˆc for 1 ă i ă µ, and Mµ P Zcˆdˆ1 are 3rd-order tensors with
i.i.d. entries drawn from the distribution Dghl . For the special case of k “ 1, we omit the superscript
and simply write fTTpµ,cq to denote the one-row tensor train random projection.
                         pjq
   We also write tMi uiPrµs,jPrks Ð χTT pk, m, d, µ, cq to denote the sampling of the core tensors and
                        »                           fi
                                       ..
                        —    ´          .         ¯ffi
        pjq                       pjq          pjq ffi
TTptMi uiPrµs,jPrks q “ —Mat M1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b Mµ ffi P Zkˆm to denote the resulting k-row TTRP
                        —
                        –                           fl
                                      ..
                                       .
matrix for simplicity.
8
  The general definition of the TT-decomposition allows the dimension d and internal rank c to vary across core
  tensors, but this uniform formulation is sufficient for this paper.
9
  Specifically, N p0, c´1{2 q for i P t1, µu and N p0, c´1 q for 1 ă i ă µ.
                    Succinct Shortness Check Under a Few Kilobytes via Tensor Train Random Projections     11

Lemma 3 (Second and Fourth Moments). Let x P Zm be a fixed vector. For the one-row
tensor train random projection y “ fTTpµ,cq pxq, we have
                                             “ ‰ cµ´1
                                            E y 2 “ µ }x}22 , and                                        (11)
                                                     2
                                          “ ‰ 3 cpc ` 2q µ´1
                                                   ˆ     ˙
                                         E y4 ď                 }x}42 .                                  (12)
                                                 4     4
      The proof is deferred to Section A.2

3.2     Bounding Modular Overflows
Lemma 4. Let x P r´q{2, q{2sm be a fixed vector such that }x}8 ě B for some B ă q{4. For the
one-row tensor train random projection fTTpµ,cq , we have
                             „                          ȷ
                               ˇ                  ˇ   B   1 µ´1
                          Pr fTTpµ,cq pxq mod q ă µ ď ` c`1 .
                               ˇ                  ˇ                                     (13)
                                                      2   2   2
Proof. Let y :“ fTTpµ,cq pxq mod q “ pJ x mod q, where pJ :“ Mat pM1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b Mµ q P Z1ˆm . By
applying the mixed-product property (Fact 1), we evaluate this inner product iteratively from right
to left. Defining Mi :“ MatpMi q, we construct the sequence of intermediate computation state vpiq :
                         vpµq :“ x,
                       vpi´1q :“ pIdi´1 b Mi q vpiq mod q,       for i “ µ, µ ´ 1, . . . , 2,
                              p0q             p1q
                          v         :“ M1 v         mod q “ y.
     Let Ei denote the event that }vpiq }8 ě B{2µ´i . By hypothesis, }vpµq }8 “ }x}8 ě B, yielding
PrrEµ s “ 1. For any 2 ď i ď µ, assume Ei holds. We partition the column vector vpiq into di´1 blocks.
Since }vpiq }8 ě B{2µ´i , there exists at least one block u˚ satisfying }u˚ }8 ě B{2µ´i . Applying
Lemma 2 to each row of Mi , the probability that the absolute value of a single component of Mi u˚
is less than B{2µ´i`1 is bounded by 1{2. Since the c rows are sampled independently, the probability
that at least one component preserves the bound B{2µ´i`1 satisfies PrrEi´1 | Ei s ě 1 ´ 2´c . For
the final projection y “ M1 vp1q mod q, M1 P Z1ˆcd consists of a single row. Conditioning on E1 ,
Lemma 2 yields PrrE0 | E1 s ě 1{2. The probability of E0 (the event |y| ě B{2µ ) is bounded using
Bernoulli’s inequality
                                                    ˆ           ˙
                                1`       ´c µ´1
                                           ˘      1       µ´1        1 µ´1
                      PrrE0 s ě    1´2          ě     1´      c
                                                                  “ ´ c`1 .                       (14)
                                2                 2         2        2   2
      Therefore, Prr␣E0 s “ 1 ´ PrrE0 s ď 12 ` 2µ´1
                                                 c`1 .

Theorem 2. Let µ, c, k ě 1. For any fixed vector x P r´q{2, q{2sm satisfying }x}8 ě B8 for some
                                    k
B8 ă q{4, the k-row projection y “ fTTpµ,cq pxq mod q P Zkq satisfies

                                                     1 µ´1 k
                                 „             ȷ ˆ              ˙
                                           B8
                              Pr }y}8 ă µ ď            ` c`1        .
                                            2        2     2
                                        ?
Furthermore, if }x}2 ě B for some B ă q m{4, the projection satisfies
                                                      1 µ´1 k
                                „               ȷ ˆ               ˙
                                            B
                             Pr }y}2 ă ? µ ď            ` c`1         .
                                            m2        2     2
For any constant integer δ ě 1, setting the internal rank c ě rlog2 pµ ´ 1qs ` δ and the row count
             λ                                            ´λ .
k ě ´ log p1{2`2´δ´1 q P Opλq bounds this probability by 2
           2
12     Zhiyuan Geng and Maxime Plançon

Proof. We first prove the bound for the ℓ8 norm. The mapping generates k independent outputs
     ´            ¯piq
        k
yi “ fTTpµ,cq pxq      mod q. By Lemma 4, the probability that a single component is bounded by
the threshold is                           „          ȷ
                                                   B8   1 µ´1
                                pfail :“ Pr |yi | ă µ ď ` c`1 .
                                                    2   2    2
The condition }y}8 ă B8 {2µ necessitates |yi | ă B8 {2µ for all i P rks. Since the k rows are sampled
independently, the probability of this joint event is bounded by ppfail qk

                                                            1 µ´1 k
                             „              ȷ             ˆ            ˙
                                        B8            k
                          Pr }y}8 ă µ ď ppfail q ď            ` c`1        .
                                         2                  2    2
   The bound for the ℓ2 norm follows from algebraic relations. The hypothesis }x}2 ěı B implies
         ?                          ?                                ”
                                                                                B
}x}8 ě B{ m. Substituting B8 “ B{ m into the ℓ8 bound yields Pr }y}8 ă ?m2         µ  ď ppfail qk .
                                         B                    ? B µ . Thus, the probability is bounded
Since }y}2 ě }y}8 , the event }y}2 ă ?m2   µ implies }y}8 ă    m2
by the same value.
   Substituting c ě rlog2 pµ ´ 1qs ` δ yields 2c`1 ě pµ ´ 1q2δ`1 . This bounds the per-row failure
probability by pfail ď 1{2`2´δ´1 . To bound the overall probability by 2´λ requires p1{2`2´δ´1 qk ď
2´λ , which yields the sufficient condition k ě λ{p´ log2 p1{2 ` 2´δ´1 qq.

3.3   ℓ2 Concentration Bounds and Slack Factor.
Theorem 2 provides a probabilistic bound for the ℓ8 norm mod q. A key advantage of this ℓ8 -based
analysis is its parameter efficiency. Instantiating the TTRP with d P Op1q and c P Oplog µq achieves
λ bits of soundness for a projection dimension k P Opλq, yielding the asymptotic representation size
of Opλ log mplog log mq2 q P Õpλq.
    Applying norm equivalence bounds on Theorem 2 to obtain an ℓ2 -concentration bound incurs a
                 1
large factor ?m2   µ . To achieve a tighter ℓ2 slack, we introduce a variance-based analysis in Lemma

5 and Theorem 3. Compared to Theorem 2, our ℓ2 slack factor is tighter, while the internal rank
increases to c “ Oplog mq. We note that the overall complexity remains Õpλq.
                                               µ´1
                                                                 ´      ¯µ´1
Lemma 5. Let x P Zm be fixed, η2 “ c 2µ , and η4 “ 43 cpc`2q         4       . For the one-row TTRP
y “ fTTpµ,cq pxq and any θ P p0, η2 q, we have

                                                           pη2 ´ θq2
                                   Pr y 2 ą θ}x}22 ě
                                     “            ‰
                                                                        .
                                                        η4 ´ 2η2 θ ` θ2
                              k
For the k-row projection y “ fTTpµ,cq pxq, we have
                                                                               ˙k
                              ”      ?     ı ˆ                  pη2 ´ θq2
                            Pr }y}2 ď θ}x}2 ď 1 ´                                   .                 (15)
                                                             η4 ´ 2η2 θ ` θ2
Proof. By Lemma 3, the moments of y 2 are Ery 2 s “ η2 }x}22 and Ery 4 s ď η4 }x}42 . Cantelli’s inequality
states that for any random variable Z with expectation µZ and variance σZ2 , and for any t ą 0:
                     2
PrrZ ą µZ ´ ts ě σ2t`t2 .
                     Z
    Let Z “ y 2 with µZ “ Ery 2 s and σZ2 “ Ery 4 s´pEry 2 sq2 . Setting the deviation t “ Ery 2 s´θ}x}22 “
pη2 ´ θq}x}22 ą 0, we obtain
                                                t2                      pη2 ´ θq2 }x}42
                Pr y 2 ą θ}x}22 ě
                  “            ‰
                                                               “                              .
                                     Ery 4 s ´ pEry 2 sq2 ` t2   Ery 4 s ´ p2η2 θ ´ θ2 q}x}42
                  Succinct Shortness Check Under a Few Kilobytes via Tensor Train Random Projections   13

Substituting the upper bound Ery 4 s ď η4 }x}42 yields the single-row bound. Amplifying by k-row
repetition, we get the Eq.(15).

Theorem 3. Let µ, c, k ě 1. Let θ, η2 , η4 be defined as in Lemma 5.                     m be a fixed
                                                                   "´Let x P r´q{2, q{2s           ¯k *
                                                                                    2
                                                                                      ¯k ´
                                               q                            pη2 ´θq        1   µ´1
vector such that }x}2 ě B for some B ă 2µ`1 ?θcµ´1 m . Let p :“ max 1 ´ η4 ´2η2 θ`θ2 , 2 ` 2c`1        .
                              k
For the k-row projection y “ fTTpµ,cq pxq mod q P Zkq , we have
                                           ”      ? ı
                                         Pr }y}2 ď θB ď p

Proof. We have two cases:
                   q
 – If }x}8 ě 2¨cµ´1   m
                        , by Lemma 4, the probability that }y}8 smaller than 2µ`1 ¨cqµ´1 m is at most
   ´          ¯k
         µ´1
     1
     2 ` 2c`1    , since B ă 2µ`1 ?qθcµ´1 m then
                                                                             ˆ             ˙k
                      ”      ? ı     ”                       q       ı           1 µ´1
                    Pr }y}2 ď θB ď Pr }y}2 ă                           ď           ` c`1
                                                       2µ`1 ¨ cµ´1 m             2   2
                 q                                         k
 – If }x}8 ă 2¨cµ´1 m
                      , here with probability one we have fTTpµ,cq pxq P r˘q{2sk . So mod-q reduction
   has no effect and the assertion follows directly from Lemma 5.

4     Shortness Proof via TTRP

In this section, we demonstrate how the tensor train random projection serves as a modular com-
ponent to integrate approximate range proofs into reductions of knowledge for lattice relations.

4.1    Norm Check for Ξ poly
We describe a norm check protocol for the Ξ poly relation which is formalized as an interactive
reduction of knowledge Π 0 (Figure 1) from the polynomial map relation Ξ poly to the sumcheck
relation Ξ sum .
     The core mechanism is to replace the norm bound in the relation Ξ poly by tensor train random
                                                     pjq                            k
projection. The verifier sends the core tensors tMi uiPrµs,jPrks defining a TTRP fTTpµ,cq p¨q, then the
                                                               k
prover sends the projection of the witness coefficients y0 “ fTTpµ,cq pcfpvecpWqqq. The verifier checks
                                       a
the expected bound ?  }y 0 } 2 ď B̂ :“   kpc{2qµ´1 ¨ B which holds with probability at least 1{2 and
implies }W} ď B̂{ θ with overwhelming probability p. To prove well-formedness, the projection is
lifted to Rq and formulated as sumcheck claims over the ring. We note that TTRP can actually be
captured by relation Ξ poly , so it can also be regarded as a self-RoK.

Theorem 4. Let ν, µ, d, c, k, θ, p be the TTRP parameters                ν           µ
                                                       bsatisfying mr “ 2 and mrφ “ d . Let
                                                                  kcµ´1
B be the norm bound defined as in Theorem 3. Let B̃ :“            θ2µ´1
                                                                        B.

 – Π 0 is correct with a correctness error of 1{2, reducing the relation

                                               Ξnpoly Ñ Ξn,k
                                                         sum
                                                             1.

                                                                         1
 – Π 0 is knowledge sound with a knowledge error of δ0 “ p ` q ´k for the reduction
                                          poly    sis        sum-rel
                                         ΞB̃   Y Ξ2B  1 ϱ Ð ΞB 1 ,ϱ  .
14       Zhiyuan Geng and Maxime Plançon


     mr “ 2ν ,   mrφ “ dµ “ 2µℓ
     P pT; Wq P Ξ poly                                                       V pTq
                                                         pjq
                                                       tMi uiPrµs,jPrks          pjq
     Define the integer matrix                      ÐÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝ tMi uiPrµs,jPrks Ð χTT pk, mrφ, d, µ, cq
                            pjq
       MZ :“ TTptMi uiPrµs,jPrks q P Zkˆmrφ
     M :“ cf ´1 pMZ q P Rkˆmr
                         q

     y :“ M ¨ vecpWq mod q P Rkq
                                                            y0                ?
                                                                                      b ` ˘
                                                                                            µ´1
     y0 :“ ctpyq P Zkq                              ÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÑ }y0 }2 ď B̂ :“ k 2c       ¨B
                                                             Γ                k1 ˆk
                                                    ÐÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝ Γ Ð Zq
                        1                                   y1                ?
     y1 “ Γ ¨ y P Rkq                               ÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÑ ctpy1 q “ Γ ¨ y0
     ......................................................................................................
     Rewrite y1 “ Γ ¨ M ¨ vecpWq as k1 sumcheck claims
                                  1
       Let M˚ :“ ΓM P Rkq ˆmr and let m˚piq denote the i-th row of M˚ .
                `            ˘
       Define gi mlervecpWqs pzq :“ mlerm˚piq spzq ¨ mlervecpWqspzq ´ yi1 ¨ pmrq´1 pmod qq.
                         `           ˘
       Claims zPt0,1uν gi mlervecpWqs pzq “ 0 pmod qq, @i P rk1 s
              ř


                                      Fig. 1. Protocol Π 0 — RoK from Ξ poly to Ξ sum .


      The proof is deferred to Section A.1
Remark 1 (Achieving Opλq Communication Complexity). To achieve a soundness error of 2´λ in
Figure 1, the batching of k constraints over Zq via the challenge matrix Γ requires a row di-
mension k 1 “ Ωpλ{ log qq. Transmitting the k 1 ring elements of the aggregated vector y1 therefore
yields a communication complexity at least quadratic in λ. For the purpose of asymptotic effi-
ciency, this complexity can be reduced to Õpλq by applying the “Lift-and-Batch” technique from
[KLNO25,KLN` 26], which lifts multiple partial trace equalities to ring equalities via intermediate
subrings.
Remark 2 (Variance-Based Completeness Bound). In the proof of Theorem 4, we establish the com-
pleteness bound B̂ using Markov’s inequality based on the expected squared norm. One can derive
a variance-based upper bound using Cantelli’s inequality on the sum of independent projection rows
to parameterize the completeness error. While this approach tightens the constant factors of the
verification check, it provides no asymptotic reduction to the extraction slack factor B̃{B. The slack
is dominated by the divergence between the second and fourth moments of the TTRP distribution,
which scales exponentially with the tensor order µ.

4.2     Linearisation via Sumcheck
Observe the k 1 sumcheck claims in the output relation Ξ sum of Π 0 in Figure 1
                                ÿ
                                     gi pzq “ 0 pmod qq, @i P rk 1 s,
                                       zPt0,1uν

where gi pzq :“ mlerm˚piq spzq ¨ mlervecpWqspzq ´ yi1 ¨ 2´ν pmod qq. To batch these constraints, the
                                                                1
verifier samples a random combiner γ “ pγ1 , . . . , γk1 q Ð Rkq and sends it to the prover. We define
                  Succinct Shortness Check Under a Few Kilobytes via Tensor Train Random Projections     15

a batched summation claim as
                                       k 1
                                       ÿ              ÿ
                                             γi              gi pzq “ 0   pmod qq.                     (16)
                                       i“1        zPt0,1uν

   By invoking the basic sumcheck protocol (Lemma 1), the original k 1 summation claims are
reduced to a single evaluation claim at a random challenge point r Ð C ν generated by the verifier
                                             k    1
                                             ÿ
                                                      γi gi prq “ v   pmod qq,
                                             i“1

where v is the terminal value claimed by the prover. To check this terminal relation, the verifier
evaluates mlerm˚piq sprq locally. The prover then sends the evaluation wr :“ mlervecpWqsprq, allowing
the verifier to check
                             k1
                                     ´                                    ¯
                         ?
                             ÿ
                      v“           γi mlerm˚piq sprq ¨ wr ´ yi1 ¨ pmrqq´1            pmod qq.          (17)
                             i“1

    The verifier then evaluates mlerm˚piq sprq locally. The prover sends the evaluation wr :“ mlervecpWqsprq,
allowing the verifier to check
                             k1
                                     ´                                    ¯
                         ?
                             ÿ
                      v“           γi mlerm˚piq sprq ¨ wr ´ yi1 ¨ pmrqq´1            pmod qq.          (18)
                             i“1

   Since conjugation over Rq is an automorphism, it satisfies the identity

                                      mlervecpWqsprq “ mlervecpWqsprq

for any challenge point r P Rνq . The verifier conjugates the prover’s message to obtain mlervecpWqsprq “
wr , and appends this evaluation claim on the original vectorized witness at the conjugated point
r to the relation Ξ poly as a new polynomial map constraint. From now on, we abuse the notation
mlervecpWqsprq “ wr to denote this evaluation claim, given this equivalence.

Corollary 1. Let Rq – Fqe φ{e . Let C be the challenge set for the sumcheck protocol and δ0 be the
knowledge error of Π 0 (Figure 1). Assume a TTRP instantiated with the parameters from Theorem
4. Let Π sc be basic sumcheck protocol (Lemma 1). There exists a self-RoK Π TTRP for the relation
Ξ poly defined as the composition Π TTRP “ Π sc ˝ Π 0 such that
 – Π TTRP is complete with a completeness error of 1{2, reducing the relation
                                                                    poly
                                                          Ξnpoly Ñ Ξn`1  .
                                                                   2ν
 – Π TTRP is knowledge sound with a knowledge error of δ0 ` q ´e ` |C| for the reduction

                                                   poly    sis       poly-rel
                                                  ΞB̃   Y Ξ2B  1ϱ Ð Ξ 1
                                                                     B ,ϱ ,

   where B̃ is defined as in Theorem 4.

Proof. The completeness error follows from Lemma 1 and Theorem 4. The knowledge error is
bounded by a union bound over three terms
16     Zhiyuan Geng and Maxime Plançon

 – δ0 : The knowledge error of Π 0 .
                                                                                              1
 – q ´e : The collision probability of the random linear combination in Eq.(16). Since γ Ð Rkq and
   Rq – Fqe φ{e , a non-zero vector vanishes with probability at most q ´e .
   2ν
 – |C| : The soundness error of the basic sumcheck protocol (Lemma 1) for ν variables, as the
   maximum individual degree of gi is 2.
Lemma 6 (Efficiency of Π TTRP ). Let C be the sumcheck challenge set. The protocol Π TTRP
(Corollary 1) has the following costs, where mr “ 2ν and mrφ “ dµ “ 2µℓ
 – Prover runtime: Opkcmrφq operations over Zq and Opmrq operations over Rq . This includes
   evaluating the TTRP projection, batching k 1 sumcheck claims, and executing the ν-variate basic
   sumcheck for a degree 2 polynomial.
 – Verifier runtime Sampling Opkc2 dµq elements from Dghl and Opk 1 kq elements from Zq . Eval-
   uating the ν-variate multilinear extension via block-wise tensor contraction requires Opkµ1 c2 dq
   operations over Rq and Opkcφq additions. Forming the aggregated claims requires Opk 1 kq oper-
   ations over Rq .
 – Prover-to-verifier communication: k elements over Zq , k 1 ` 1 elements over Rq and 2ν elements
   over Fqe .
Proof. Prover Runtime The prover runtime is dominated by the computation of the projection
y0 “ MZ ¨ cfpvecpWqq pmod qq. We focus on this computation, other costs follow directly from the
protocol description. The projection is evaluated via right-to-left tensor contraction which takes the
                                                     µ
flattened coefficient vector x :“ cfpvecpWqq P Zdq as input. The contraction sequence computes
        ´                ¯                                                         ´       ¯
                     pjq                                                  pjq          pjq
vi´1 “ Idi´1 b Mi          vi pmod qq for i “ µ, µ ´ 1, . . . , 1, where Mi :“ Mat Mi . Since the
                     pjq
internal matrices Mi are over Z, the sequence consists exclusively of integer multiplications. The
total cost for k rows is dominated by the initial layers, yielding Opkcdµ q “ Opkcmrφq operations
over Zq .
Verifier Runtime We analyze the computational cost for the verifier to evaluate the multilinear
extension mlerm˚piq sprq for the i-th aggregated row, where i P rk 1 s. By the linearity of the multilinear
extension, this evaluation can be expressed as mlerm˚piq sprq “ Γpiq mlerMsprq. Here, Γpiq is the i-
th row of the challenge matrix Γ, and mlerMsprq is a column vector containing the evaluations
mlerMpjq sprq for each original row j P rks.
    Let mr “ 2ν be the spatial dimension. The verifier computes mlerMpjq sprq directly without
explicitly computing the length-mr polynomial vector as follows. The i-th polynomial in the vector
Mpjq can be expanded as Mi “ φ´1
                               pjq    ř       pjq   h                          h
                                        h“0 MZ,i,h X . In this expansion, X is the polynomial basis,
       pjq
and MZ,i,h is the integer entry of the underlying tensor network at spatial index i P t0, 1uν and
coefficient index h P t0, . . . , φ ´ 1u, i.e., i-th polynomial’s h-th coefficient.
   Let χi prq denote the multilinear basis polynomial evaluated at the challenge point r P C ν . The
evaluation of the polynomial vector expands and rearranges as
                                       ˜φ´1              ¸             ¨                     ˛
                                  ÿ       ÿ pjq                    φ´1
                                                                   ÿ      ÿ         pjq
            mlerMpjq sprq “                   MZ,i,h X h χi prq “      ˝        MZ,i,h χi prq‚X h
                            iPt0,1uν   h“0                     h“0   iPt0,1uν

This equation shows that the h-th coefficient of the evaluation mlerMpjq sprq is exactly the spatial
multilinear extension of the h-th coefficient slice of the tensor, evaluated at r.
   The verifier computes these φ coefficients simultaneously by exploiting the tensor structure.
Let d “ 2ℓ be the core dimension. The µ tensor cores partition into µ1 “ ν{ℓ spatial cores and
µ2 “ plog2 φq{ℓ coefficient cores. Let c be the internal rank.
                       Succinct Shortness Check Under a Few Kilobytes via Tensor Train Random Projections               17

    The spatial multilinear extension is independent of the coefficient index h. The verifier chunks
the challenge point r into µ1 blocks of length ℓ. Evaluating the multilinear extension of each spatial
core at the corresponding chunk and computing their chain matrix product yields a 1 ˆ c boundary
vector vpjq prq. This step contracts the spatial dimensions and requires Opµ1 c2 dq operations over Rq .
    To recover the φ evaluated coefficients, the verifier multiplies the boundary vector vpjq prq by the
remaining µ2 coefficient cores. Since these coefficient cores contain only elements from t´1, 0, 1u, ex-
tracting all φ coefficients requires Opcφq additions. Applying the embedding maps these coefficients
to the final evaluated ring element in Rq .
    For all k rows, this tensor-structured coefficient evaluation takes Opkpµ1 c2 d ` cφqq operations.
Finally, computing the k 1 linear combinations with the challenge matrix Γ takes Opk 1 kq operations
over Rq .

5      Integration to Proof Systems

In this section, we instantiate the integration of our TTRP shortness proof modules Π 0 and Π TTRP
into the lattice-based proof systems LaBRADOR [BS23] and RoKoko [KLN` 26]. We assume famil-
iarity with these protocols and recall their shortness proof mechanisms.

5.1      Shortness Proofs in LaBRADOR and RoKoko
To demonstrate that a committed witness W :“ pw1 , . . . , wr q P Rmˆr satisfies the norm bound
}W} ď B, LaBRADOR applies the modular Johnson-Lindenstrauss lemma. The lemma establishes
that for some β, pβ ą 0 and every x P ZD , the projection satisfies

                                              Pr      r}Mx} ą β}x}s ≲ pβ 10 .
                                             256ˆD
                                          MÐDghl


    For every vector x P r˘q{2sD satisfying }x} ě B for a bound B ď q{125, the probability bound
is given by                           ”                ?    ı
                               Pr       }Mx mod q} ă 30B ≲ 2´128 .
                                       256ˆD
                                    MÐDghl

                                                 256ˆmrφ
The verifier samples a projection matrix M Ð Dghl        . The prover computes the projected vector
                                   256
y0 :“ M ¨ cfpvecpWqq mod q P Zq . The verifier checks whether }y0 } ď βB. This condition holds
                                                 ?
with probability
             ?    1 ´ p β and implies  }W} ă βB{   30 with probability 1 ´ 2´128 , introducing a slack
factor of β{ 30. To prove the well-formedness of y0 , the projection is expressed and aggregated as
a linear relation over Rq , compatible with the relation of the protocol. Processing the projection
matrix M requires Opλmrq verifier runtime.
    The shortness proof paradigm in RoKoko follows an analogous approach while preserving succinct
verification. We outline the differences below.

 – Structured Projection. RoKoko adopts the block-diagonal structured random projection from
   RoK and Roll [KLNO25]. For the coarse projection, the operation over the ring Rq is defined as
                                         ´             ¯
                                    V “ Im{mrp b M ¨ W
10
     The expansion factor β determines the trade-off between the extraction slack and the prover’s abort rate.
     LaBRADOR[BS23] instantiates β to match the expected squared norm. The completeness error pβ is bounded
     inherently by the right-skewness of the underlying (heuristic) chi-squared distribution of the squared projected
     norm, which ensures sufficient probability mass resides below the expectation. The prover satisfies this condition
     via rejection sampling. Alternatively, selecting a larger β yields an abort-free prover at the cost of a looser bound.
18       Zhiyuan Geng and Maxime Plançon

                    n ˆm
      where M Ð Dghlrp rp . The prover applies a gadget decomposition Yproj “ G´1 pVq and commits
      to vecpYproj q, establishing the updated constraint pIm{mrp b MqW “ GYproj pmod qq. The fine
      projection over the Zq coefficient embedding is evaluated as

                                      V “ pIφm{mrp b cf ´1  J J
                                                        _ pM q qW.


   The prover extracts the trace Vtr “ tracepVq, re-embeds it as Vemb “ cf ´1 pVtr q, and decomposes
   it into Yproj “ G´1
                    ℓ pVemb q. The consistency is proven by batching and lifting the constraints to
   Rq via random tensors.
 – Sumcheck-driven Recursion. RoKoko extends the sumcheck framework from SALSAA [KLOT25]
   to prove the well-formedness of the recursive commitments and the correctness of projections.
   Unlike LaBRADOR, RoKoko formulates and batches the structured projections as sumcheck
   claims, which are proven via the sumcheck protocol.

    During the sumcheck step, the verifier runtime is dominated by the evaluation of the multilin-
ear extension mlerMs at random challenge points. To avoid dimension expansion during witness
                                            m
repacking, the projection dimensions ratio nrprp should align with the global shrink factor ρ, the rate
at which the witness dimension is reduced, requiring mrp “ ρ ¨ nrp . Since M is unstructured, evalu-
ating mlerMs costs the verifier Opnrp mrp q “ Opρλ2 q ring operations. This Opρλ2 q cost establishes
a structural barrier. Setting ρ “ polypλq reduces the recursion depth and the overall proof size, but
increases the verifier time.

5.2     Modular Integration

Substitution in LaBRADOR. The LaBRADOR protocol does not natively employ the sumcheck
protocol. Its shortness proof relies on unstructured Johnson-Lindenstrauss projections to bound
the witness norm. Substituting the unstructured projection with the TTRP module reduces the
shortness proof complexity in each recursion round to Opλµc2 dq. The reduction Π 0 transforms
TTRP correctness into sumcheck claims, and the embedded sumcheck protocol in Π TTRP linearises
them into a polynomial evaluation claim. The terminal claim asserts that the value wr provided by
the prover equals the multilinear extension of the flattened witness at the verifier’s challenge point
r P C logpmrq
                                  wr “ mlervecpWqsprq pmod qq.
By definition of the multilinear extension, this evaluation is an inner product. To align with the
witness structure of LaBRADOR, the witness W is represented as r column vectors w1 , . . . , wr P
Rm q , assuming m and r are powers of 2. Partitioning the challenge point r into rcol P C
                                                                                                    log r and

rrow P C log m , and defining for a vector x “ px1 , . . . , xs q P Rsq the structured expansion tensorpxq “
`                                ˘J     s
  p1´x1 , x1 qb¨ ¨ ¨bp1´xs , xs q P R2q , the expanded challenge vector decomposes via the Kronecker
product
                                  tensorprq “ tensorprcol q b tensorprrow q.
Partitioning tensorprq P Rmr q   into r contiguous blocks φ1 , . . . , φr P Rm
                                                                             q , where the i-th block is
given by φi “ ρi ¨ tensorprrow q with ρi P Rq as the i-th component of tensorprcol q, the inner product
decomposes as
                                     r
                                     ÿ
                                       xφi , wi y ´ wr “ 0 pmod qq.
                                     i“1

LaBRADOR absorbs this claim into its constraints.
                  Succinct Shortness Check Under a Few Kilobytes via Tensor Train Random Projections   19

Substitution in RoKoko. The RoKoko protocol employs structured projections—specifically coarse,
fine, and batch-and-lift variants—as self-reductions for the committed-linear relation Ξ lin to bound
witness norms. Although these native projections function as self-reductions, any such relation can
alternatively be compiled into sumcheck claims. Substituting RoKoko’s random projections with
the Π 0 module transforms the projection directly into sumcheck claims. These claims are batched
with RoKoko’s internal linearization sumcheck pipeline, allowing a single execution of the sumcheck
protocol per recursion round to linearise all claims.
    This substitution yields three improvements. First, because RoKoko’s structured projections
yield large output dimensions, the prover is forced to commit to the projection image to prevent
communication blowup. In contrast, TTRP projects the witness onto a small number of rows k,
enabling the projected vector y0 to be transmitted directly in the clear. Second, avoiding projection
commitments eliminates auxiliary witness components, allowing the protocol to gain larger super-
constant shrink factors similar to LaBRADOR. Third, the verifier complexity of TTRP is lower by
a factor Opλ2 { log2 mq than that of RoKoko.

6     Integration to Folding Schemes
In this section, we provide an example of integration of our TTRP range proof module Π TTRP to a
folding scheme. We focus our attention on the most efficient lattice-based folding scheme available
Cyclo [GLLO26], and assume some familiarity.

6.1    Shortness proof of Cyclo
Cyclo is a folding scheme for R1CS relations (or its higher-degree generalization CCS [STW23])
improving on the prior work Neo [NS26]. Cyclo introduces a technique that only requires a range
proof for the fresh input witnesses, but not the accumulator. Importantly, the first step of Cyclo is
to run the sum-check linearization of CCS from [NS26,KS23] and obtain instance-witness pairs for
a linear relation for Ajtai commitments over Rq . In particular, this relation fits the formalism of
our relation Ξ poly .
    The norm proof of Cyclo works in two steps. First, the fresh witnesses w1 , . . . , wr with }wi }8 ă
B for some bound B are decomposed into log3 pBq ternary subwitnesses. For each i P rrs, these
subwitnesses are reorganised into a single longer ternary witness, and recommitted to in this form
called extension commitment. The consistency of the r extension commitments can be checked by
the verifier. The second step is to give a sum-check-based ternary proof for the extension commit-
ments. Combining the consistency of the commitments with the ternary proof for the extension
commitments yields a tight ℓ8 -norm proof.
    The reason for creating extension commitments in Cyclo is the fact that at the time, there was
no efficient succinct range RoK available.

6.2    Integration of TTRP to Cyclo
Our TTRP norm-check Π TTRP acts as an ideal drop-in replacement for Cyclo’s ternary range
proof on extension commitments. Recall that the folded relation fits the formalism of our relation
  poly
Ξf,κ,n,m,r,B , where f is the linear map that encodes the constraints, κ is the length of the com-
mitments, n the number of constraints, m the length of the witnesses over Rq , r the number of
witnesses and finally B the Euclidean norm bound.
    With the parameters that yield a 31.8 KB folding proof benchmark, the proof size Π TTRP is 3.9
KB, while Cyclo’s original range proof (extension commitments + sum-check) amounts to 10.4 +
3.16 KB. By integrating TTRP, the resulting proof size becomes 22.14 KB, i.e a 30% improvement.
20        Zhiyuan Geng and Maxime Plançon

    We now estimate the ℓ2 -norm bound of the fresh witnesses to achieve the number of folding
steps fixed at 64 in Cyclo’s benchmark. With κ ¨ φ “ 1664, the lattice estimator [APS15] gives us
a maximum extracted Euclidean norm bound of 245 . After T folding steps, the worse-case11 norm
of the accumulator grows to γT 210 B, where γ is the ℓ2 operator norm of the challenges and 210 is
our slack factor. Plugging in the numbers, we obtain B » 224 .
    We note that verifier efficiency–in particular the size of the challenges that are usually negli-
gible in proof systems–is a highly relevant metric in folding schemes, due to applications such as
Incrementally Verifiable Computation [Val08]. The verifier circuit of TTRP is significantly larger
than that of original Cyclo. This gap is caused by the large size of the core tensors, which creates
a significant overhead for applications of folding schemes in recursive proofs.

7      Parameters and Efficiency
7.1      Asymptotics
Complexity of Π 0 and Π TTRP . We analyze the asymptotic efficiency of the protocols Π 0 and Π TTRP
under the assumption of an Oplogpmrqq-bit modulus q. Let the witness be W P Rmˆr , where r
denotes the split width. The ring Rq has degree φ P Opλq. The tensor format encodes the entire
witness, yielding µ “ rlogd pmrφqs P Oplogpmrφqq tensor layers.
   We first analyze Theorem 2 asymptotically. We set the base dimension d P Op1q and the internal
rank c P Oplog µq to bound the single-row projection failure probability by a constant. The verifier
runtime is dominated by evaluating the multilinear extension of the spatial tensor cores at a random
point. Utilizing block-wise tensor contraction (Lemma 6), this evaluation requires
                         Opkµ1 c2 dq “ O λ logpmrqploglogpmrφqq2 P Õpλq
                                         `                        ˘

ring operations. The extraction slack factor B̃{B for Π 0 satisfies
                              `b
                         “ O λ ploglogpmrφqqlogpmrφq ¨ pmrq3{2 P polypmrq.
                                                                    ˘
                    B{B
                    r

This satisfies the no-overflow condition pB̃{Bq2 ă q{2 under the Oplog mrq-bit modulus.
   Next, we analyze Theorem 3. We set the threshold θ “ δη2 for a constant fraction δ P p0, 1q.
Substituting θ into the probability base of Eq.(15) yields
                                          pη2 ´ δη2 q2                 p1 ´ δq2
                               1´                             “ 1 ´ η4
                                    η4 ´ 2η2 pδη2 q ` pδη2 q2       η2
                                                                        ´ 2δ ` δ 2
                                                                      2

To bound this base by a constant less than 1, the ratio of the moments
                                      ´      ¯µ´1
                                    3 cpc`2q
                                                              2 µ´1
                                                        ˆ       ˙
                              η4    4    4
                                  “                “  3   1 `
                              η22
                                        ´ ¯µ´1
                                      1 c2                    c
                                              4   4

must be bounded by a constant. To ensure convergence, we require the internal rank to be c P
Ωpµq “ Oplogpmrφqq. Setting c “ µ yields limµÑ8 η4 {η22 “ 3e2 . The verification complexity under
this setting evaluates to
                                Opkµ1 c2 dq “ Opλ logpmrq log2 pmrφqq P Õpλq
   To optimize asymptotic verifier succinctness, we adopt the parameterization strategy derived
from Theorem 2. The proof size and prover runtime follow this parameterization framework.
11
                                                                                                         ?
     Assuming that the folded witnesses are independent, the ℓ2 -norm of the accumulator would grow as       T rather
     than T .
                     Succinct Shortness Check Under a Few Kilobytes via Tensor Train Random Projections              21

Complexity of Integration to RoKoko. We analyze the integration complexity using Π fold-split and
Π lin from RoKoko (Table 2). Our composition is

                                                                Π 0 Ñ Π fold-split Ñ Π lin

We apply TTRP for the shortness proof, proceed with the fold-and-split phase, and linearize the
constraints via a batched sumcheck protocol. In RoKoko, the verifier complexity is bounded by
Oprλ2 q. Linearizing the TTRP constraints requires Õpλq operations for any r, which circumvents
this dependence. Table 3 details the complexity comparison. The complexity of RoKoko is reported
from the original formulation.


                     Protocol                                 Prover        Verifier                    Comm.
                         fold-split         lin         sum
                     Π                  Ξ         ÑΞ          Opmrq         Opr{ log λq                 Op1q
                         lin          sum         lin                   2         2
                     Π         Ξ            ÑΞ                Opmr ` rλ q Oprλ ` log ksc ` log mq Oplog m{ log λq
                                                        `
         Table 2. Two RoKs from [KLN 26]. We set their shrink factor ρ :“ r to match our paper’s notation.




                                            RoKoko                       Ours
                                                               2
                           r“λ              Prover       mλ              Prover       mλ2 loglogpmλq
                                                            λ3 log m                   λ log2 m
                                            Verifier         log λ
                                                                         Verifier        log λ
                                                                                                ploglogpmλqq2
                                                          log2 m`λ log m              log2 m`λ log m
                                            Comm               log2 λ
                                                                         Comm              log2 λ

                           r “ mϵ Prover                 m1`ϵ λ          Prover       m1`ϵ λ loglogpmλq
                                                                                                                ϵ
                                            Verifier        mϵ λ2        Verifier     λ log mploglogpmλqq2 ` log
                                                                                                              m
                                                                                                                 λ
                                          log m`λ          log m`λ
                                 Comm       log λ
                                                     Comm    log λ
Table 3. Complexity comparison of composed succinct arguments. Big-O notation is omitted for brevity. We use the
lift-and-batch instantiation for both constructions.




7.2      Concrete Parameter Selection for TTRP

The parameter instantiation of TTRP admits multiple approaches. Following the notation in The-
orem 4, we present a strategy to minimize the TT-format size12 of the TTRP which dominate the
verifier cost in Π TTRP as we analyzed in Lemma 6. We fix the projection error p « 2´90 . For given
witness lengths m P t220 , 221 , 224 u over Rq and a predefined upper bound for the extraction slack
factor B̃{B, we iterate over all valid TT-decompositions m “ dµ , internal ranks c, and projection
row counts k up to a threshold kmax “ 300. Within this discrete space, we discard configurations
that violate the probability bounds for the modulo q overflow (Theorem 2) or the Cantelli variance
concentration (Theorem 3). The search outputs the parameters that yields the minimum TT-format
representation while satisfying the maximum slack constraint.
12
     We omit the polynomial degree φ here.
22       Zhiyuan Geng and Maxime Plançon


                                  m       Slack      k      µ      c     Repr.

                                           27       296     4     11     222.13
                                  220
                                           210      292     4     10     221.83

                                           27       296     3      7     222.41
                                  221
                                           210      278     3      7     222.32

                                           27       296     4     11     223.13
                                  224
                                           210      292     4     10     222.83
Table 4. TTRP parameter instantiation. The Repr. column presents the total size of the core tensors, given by
kdppµ ´ 2qc2 ` 2cq.




References

Ach03.   Dimitris Achlioptas. Database-friendly random projections: Johnson-lindenstrauss with binary coins. Jour-
         nal of computer and System Sciences, 66(4):671–687, 2003.
ACK21. Thomas Attema, Ronald Cramer, and Lisa Kohl. A compressed Σ-protocol theory for lattices. In Malkin
         and Peikert [MP21], pages 549–579. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-84245-1_19.
Ajt96.   Miklós Ajtai. Generating hard instances of lattice problems (extended abstract). In 28th ACM STOC,
         pages 99–108. ACM Press, May 1996. doi:10.1145/237814.237838.
AL21.    Martin R. Albrecht and Russell W. F. Lai. Subtractive sets over cyclotomic rings - limits of Schnorr-like
         arguments over lattices. In Malkin and Peikert [MP21], pages 519–548. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-84245-1_
         18.
APS15. Martin R Albrecht, Rachel Player, and Sam Scott. On the concrete hardness of learning with errors. J.
         Math. Cryptol., 9(3):169–203, 2015.
BC25a.   Dan Boneh and Binyi Chen. LatticeFold: A lattice-based folding scheme and its applications to succinct
         proof systems. In Hanaoka and Yang [HY25], pages 330–362. doi:10.1007/978-981-95-5099-9_11.
BC25b. Dan Boneh and Binyi Chen. LatticeFold+: Faster, simpler, shorter lattice-based folding for succinct proof
         systems. In Yael Tauman Kalai and Seny F. Kamara, editors, CRYPTO 2025, Part VII, volume 16006 of
         LNCS, pages 327–361. Springer, Cham, August 2025. doi:10.1007/978-3-032-01907-3_11.
BL17.    Carsten Baum and Vadim Lyubashevsky. Simple amortized proofs of shortness for linear relations over
         polynomial rings. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2017/759, 2017. URL: https://eprint.iacr.org/
         2017/759.
BLS19.   Jonathan Bootle, Vadim Lyubashevsky, and Gregor Seiler. Algebraic techniques for short(er) exact
         lattice-based zero-knowledge proofs. In Boldyreva and Micciancio [BM19], pages 176–202. doi:10.1007/
         978-3-030-26948-7_7.
BM01.    Ella Bingham and Heikki Mannila. Random projection in dimensionality reduction: applications to im-
         age and text data. In Proceedings of the seventh ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
         discovery and data mining, pages 245–250, 2001.
BM19.    Alexandra Boldyreva and Daniele Micciancio, editors. CRYPTO 2019, Part I, volume 11692 of LNCS.
         Springer, Cham, August 2019.
BS23.    Ward Beullens and Gregor Seiler. LaBRADOR: Compact proofs for R1CS from module-SIS. In Helena
         Handschuh and Anna Lysyanskaya, editors, CRYPTO 2023, Part V, volume 14085 of LNCS, pages 518–548.
         Springer, Cham, August 2023. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-38554-4_17.
CLM23. Valerio Cini, Russell W. F. Lai, and Giulio Malavolta. Lattice-based succinct arguments from van-
         ishing polynomials - (extended abstract). In Helena Handschuh and Anna Lysyanskaya, editors,
         CRYPTO 2023, Part II, volume 14082 of LNCS, pages 72–105. Springer, Cham, August 2023. doi:
         10.1007/978-3-031-38545-2_3.
DDLL13. Léo Ducas, Alain Durmus, Tancrède Lepoint, and Vadim Lyubashevsky. Lattice signatures and bimodal
         Gaussians. In Ran Canetti and Juan A. Garay, editors, CRYPTO 2013, Part I, volume 8042 of LNCS,
         pages 40–56. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, August 2013. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-40041-4_3.
DKL` 18. Léo Ducas, Eike Kiltz, Tancrède Lepoint, Vadim Lyubashevsky, Peter Schwabe, Gregor Seiler, and Damien
         Stehlé. CRYSTALS-Dilithium: A lattice-based digital signature scheme. IACR TCHES, 2018(1):238–
         268, 2018. URL: https://tches.iacr.org/index.php/TCHES/article/view/839, doi:10.13154/tches.
         v2018.i1.238-268.
                    Succinct Shortness Check Under a Few Kilobytes via Tensor Train Random Projections         23

ESLL19. Muhammed F. Esgin, Ron Steinfeld, Joseph K. Liu, and Dongxi Liu. Lattice-based zero-knowledge proofs:
         New techniques for shorter and faster constructions and applications. In Boldyreva and Micciancio [BM19],
         pages 115–146. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-26948-7_5.
GHL22. Craig Gentry, Shai Halevi, and Vadim Lyubashevsky. Practical non-interactive publicly verifiable se-
         cret sharing with thousands of parties. In Orr Dunkelman and Stefan Dziembowski, editors, EURO-
         CRYPT 2022, Part I, volume 13275 of LNCS, pages 458–487. Springer, Cham, May / June 2022.
         doi:10.1007/978-3-031-06944-4_16.
GLLO26. Albert Garreta, Helger Lipmaa, Urmas Luhaäär, and Michal Osadnik. Cyclo: Lightweight lattice-based fold-
         ing via partial range checks. In Joan Daemen and Emmanuel Thomé, editors, EUROCRYPT 2026, Part VII,
         volume 16547 of LNCS, pages 33–62. Springer, Cham, May 2026. doi:10.1007/978-3-032-25336-1_2.
HY25.    Goichiro Hanaoka and Bo-Yin Yang, editors. ASIACRYPT 2025, Part III, volume 16247 of LNCS. Springer,
         Singapore, December 2025.
JL84.    William B Johnson and Joram Lindenstrauss. Extensions of lipschitz mappings into a hilbert space.
         Contemporary mathematics, 26(189-206):1, 1984.
KLN` 26. Michael Klooss, Russell W. F. Lai, Ngoc Khanh Nguyen, Michal Osadnik, and Lorenzo Tucci. RoKoko:
         Lattice-based succinct arguments, a committed refinement. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2026/575,
         2026. URL: https://eprint.iacr.org/2026/575.
KLNO24. Michael Klooß, Russell W. F. Lai, Ngoc Khanh Nguyen, and Michal Osadnik. RoK, paper, SISsors toolkit
         for lattice-based succinct arguments - (extended abstract). In Kai-Min Chung and Yu Sasaki, editors,
         ASIACRYPT 2024, Part V, volume 15488 of LNCS, pages 203–235. Springer, Singapore, December 2024.
         doi:10.1007/978-981-96-0935-2_7.
KLNO25. Michael Klooß, Russell W. F. Lai, Ngoc Khanh Nguyen, and Michal Osadnik. RoK and roll - verifier-
         efficient random projection for Õpλq-size lattice arguments - (extended abstract). In Hanaoka and Yang
         [HY25], pages 297–329. doi:10.1007/978-981-95-5099-9_10.
KLOT25. Shuto Kuriyama, Russell W. F. Lai, Michal Osadnik, and Lorenzo Tucci. Salsaa - sumcheck-aided lattice-
         based succinct arguments and applications. IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch., 2025:2124, 2025. URL: https:
         //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:283252607.
KS23.    Abhiram Kothapalli and Srinath Setty. HyperNova: Recursive arguments for customizable constraint sys-
         tems. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2023/573, 2023. URL: https://eprint.iacr.org/2023/573.
LNP22. Vadim Lyubashevsky, Ngoc Khanh Nguyen, and Maxime Plançon. Lattice-based zero-knowledge proofs
         and applications: Shorter, simpler, and more general. In Yevgeniy Dodis and Thomas Shrimpton, editors,
         CRYPTO 2022, Part II, volume 13508 of LNCS, pages 71–101. Springer, Cham, August 2022. doi:
         10.1007/978-3-031-15979-4_3.
LNS21.   Vadim Lyubashevsky, Ngoc Khanh Nguyen, and Gregor Seiler. SMILE: Set membership from ideal lattices
         with applications to ring signatures and confidential transactions. In Malkin and Peikert [MP21], pages
         611–640. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-84245-1_21.
LS18.    Vadim Lyubashevsky and Gregor Seiler. Short, invertible elements in partially splitting cyclotomic rings
         and applications to lattice-based zero-knowledge proofs. In Jesper Buus Nielsen and Vincent Rijmen,
         editors, EUROCRYPT 2018, Part I, volume 10820 of LNCS, pages 204–224. Springer, Cham, April / May
         2018. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-78381-9_8.
Lyu09.   Vadim Lyubashevsky. Fiat-Shamir with aborts: Applications to lattice and factoring-based signatures.
         In Mitsuru Matsui, editor, ASIACRYPT 2009, volume 5912 of LNCS, pages 598–616. Springer, Berlin,
         Heidelberg, December 2009. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-10366-7_35.
Lyu12.   Vadim Lyubashevsky. Lattice signatures without trapdoors. In David Pointcheval and Thomas Johansson,
         editors, EUROCRYPT 2012, volume 7237 of LNCS, pages 738–755. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, April
         2012. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-29011-4_43.
MP21.    Tal Malkin and Chris Peikert, editors. CRYPTO 2021, Part II, volume 12826 of LNCS, Virtual Event,
         August 2021. Springer, Cham.
NS24.    Ngoc Khanh Nguyen and Gregor Seiler. Greyhound: Fast polynomial commitments from lattices. In
         Leonid Reyzin and Douglas Stebila, editors, CRYPTO 2024, Part X, volume 14929 of LNCS, pages 243–
         275. Springer, Cham, August 2024. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-68403-6_8.
NS26.    Wilson Nguyen and Srinath Setty. Neo and superneo: Post-quantum folding with pay-per-bit costs over
         small fields. In Annual International Cryptology Conference, pages 492–523. Springer, 2026.
Osa26.   Michal Osadnik. PikkuFold: Efficient folding in a few kilobytes. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper
         2026/1809, 2026. URL: https://eprint.iacr.org/2026/1809.
Ose11.   Ivan V Oseledets. Tensor-train decomposition. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 33(5):2295–2317,
         2011.
RR20.    Beheshteh Rakhshan and Guillaume Rabusseau. Tensorized random projections. In International Confer-
         ence on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 3306–3316. PMLR, 2020.
24      Zhiyuan Geng and Maxime Plançon

RR21.    Beheshteh T Rakhshan and Guillaume Rabusseau. Rademacher random projections with tensor networks.
         arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.13970, 2021.
STW23. Srinath Setty, Justin Thaler, and Riad Wahby. Customizable constraint systems for succinct arguments.
         Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2023/552, 2023. URL: https://eprint.iacr.org/2023/552.
Val08.   Paul Valiant. Incrementally verifiable computation or proofs of knowledge imply time/space efficiency. In
         Theory of cryptography conference, pages 1–18. Springer, 2008.
YAZ` 19. Rupeng Yang, Man Ho Au, Zhenfei Zhang, Qiuliang Xu, Zuoxia Yu, and William Whyte. Efficient lattice-
         based zero-knowledge arguments with standard soundness: Construction and applications. In Boldyreva
         and Micciancio [BM19], pages 147–175. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-26948-7_6.
                 Succinct Shortness Check Under a Few Kilobytes via Tensor Train Random Projections   25




                         Supplementary Material



A     Omitted Proofs

A.1    Proof of theorem 4
Proof. The k 1 sumcheck claims evaluate the polynomials gi over the boolean hypercube t0, 1uν .
Each summation yields xm˚piq , vecpWqy ´ yi1 “ 0 mod q. For all i P rk 1 s, the k 1 sumcheck claims
establish y1 “ Γ ¨ M ¨ vecpWq mod q.
Correctness. Consider an instance pT, Wq P Ξ poly . The j-th row of y is evaluated as
                                                          mr
                                                          ÿ      pjq
                         ypjq “ Mpjq ¨ vecpWq mod q “           Mh Wh mod q.
                                                          h“1

   Taking the constant term of ypjq and utilizing the property of power-of-two cyclotomic rings
where ctpab̄q “ xcfpaq, cfpbqy, we obtain
               mr
               ÿ       ´     ¯ ÿmr    ´     ¯
         pjq             pjq            pjq             pjq
        y0 “         ct Mh Wh “    xcf Mh , cfpWh qy “ MZ ¨ cfpvecpWqq                  pmod qq.
               h“1                  h“1

    Given }W}2 ă B, the expected squared norm of y0 is bounded by
                                    ˆ ˙µ                        ˆ ˙µ
                         2      µ´1 1                  2     µ´1 1
                                                                     B2.
                    “      ‰
                  E }y0 }2 “ kc           }cfpvecpWqq}2 ă kc
                                     2                            2
                                                                                            “           “   ‰‰
Since }y0 }22 is a non-negative random variable, applying Markov’s inequality yields Pr }y0 }22 ě 2E }y0 }22 ď
                                                   b ` ˘
1                                                         µ´1
2 . An honest prover passes the check }y0 }2 ď       k 2c      ¨ B with probability at least 1{2. The iden-
tity check holds as
                                  ctpy1 q “ ctpΓ ¨ yq “ Γ ¨ ctpyq “ Γ ¨ y0 .
                                     b
Knowledge Soundness. Let B̂ :“ k pc{2qµ´1 B. Since the polynomial map constraint f pWq “ 0 is
preserved in the reduction, we omit it from the following proof for simplicity. We split the protocol
into two phases and analyze them separately.
                                                                                        `
                                                       0 which reduces an instance T, pW, Sq to an
                                                                                                   ˘
 a) The tensor train random projection phase ΠTT
     instance with additional norm and constant term checks on the projected witness
                   “          ‰   “`           ˘                                              ‰
                     T, pW, Sq ÞÑ T, pW, Sq and ctpM ¨ vecpWqq “ y0 and }y0 }2 ď B̂ .
                                                                   ˚ , V y.
    This corresponds to the first challenge-response, denoted by xPTT   TT
26      Zhiyuan Geng and Maxime Plançon

                          0 which reduces an instance as
b) The aggregation phase ΠSZ
     “`          ˘                          ‰    “`      ˘                                        ‰
        T, pW, Sq and ctpM ¨ vecpWqq “ y0 ÞÑ T, pW, Sq                  and    Γ ¨ M ¨ vecpWq “ y1 .
                                                                   ˚ , V y.
     This corresponds to the ν-th challenge-response, denoted by xPSZ   SZ

Extractor ESZ . W.L.O.G., assume that the prover PSZ   ˚ is deterministic. E                      ˚
                                                                             SZ runs the prover PSZ
                        k 1 ˆk                    1
on some challenges Γ Ð Zq      until it obtains py , W, Sq satisfying the constraints. If the prover
fails, then abort.
                               A ¨ W “ T mod q,                      }S}op ď ϱ,
                                           1
                      Γ ¨ M ¨ vecpWq “ y mod q,             }WS mod q}2 ď B 1 ,
                                ctpy1 q “ Γ ¨ y0 mod q.

If ctpM ¨ vecpWqq “ y0 mod q, ESZ outputs pW, Sq and concludes the extraction. Otherwise, ESZ
                    ˚ on new challenges Γ1 to obtain py2 , W1 , S1 q satisfying
re-runs the prover PSZ
                              A ¨ W1 “ T mod q,                         }S1 }8 ď ϱ,
                     Γ1 ¨ M ¨ vecpW1 q “ y2 mod q,          }W1 S1 mod q}2 ď B 1 ,
                               ctpy2 q “ Γ1 ¨ y0 mod q.
If W ‰ W1 mod q, then WSS1 ´ W1 S1 S ‰ 0 mod q. This yields ApWSS1 ´ W1 S1 Sq “ 0 and
                                                                                                 sis .
}WSS1 ´W1 S1 S mod q}2 ď 2B 1 ϱ. Any non-zero column x1 of this difference satisfies pA, x1 q P Ξ2B 1ϱ
            1
   If W “ W mod q and the trace conditions diverge
                                     ctpM ¨ vecpWqq ‰ y0 mod q,
                                 ctpΓ1 ¨ M ¨ vecpWqq “ Γ1 ¨ y0 mod q,
                                                                                    `                   ˘
since Γ1 is over Zq , we have Γ1 ¨ctpM¨vecpWqq “ Γ1 ¨y0 mod q. Thus, the vector Γ1 ¨ ctpM ¨ vecpWqq ´ y0 mod
q is an evaluation of k 1 independent random linear combinations. By the Schwartz-Zippel lemma,
if the constant vector ctpM ¨ vecpWqq ´ y0 is non-zero, this evaluation yields 0 with probability at
          1
most q ´k .

Extractor ETT . W.L.O.G., assume that the prover PTT    ˚ is deterministic. E runs the prover P ˚ on
                                                                             TT                   TT
                   pjq
some challenges tMi uiPrµs,jPrks until it obtains py0 , W, Sq satisfying the constraints. If the prover
fails, then abort.
                              A ¨ W “ T mod q,                          }S}op ď ϱ,
                     ctpM ¨ vecpWqq “ y0 mod q,            }W ¨ S mod q}2 ď B 1 ,
                                                                        }y0 }2 ď B̂.

If }W}2 ď B̃, then ETT outputs pW, Sq and concludes the extraction. If }W}2 ą B̃, then ETT re-runs
the prover PTT ˚ on new challenges tM1pjq u to obtain py1 , W1 , S1 q bounded similarly.
                                        i                  0
    As before, if W ‰ W1 mod q, we extract a SIS solution x1 P Ξ2B      sis . Assuming W “ W1 mod q,
                                                                           1ϱ

the verifier’s ℓ2 norm check ensures that }y0 }2 ď B̂. Since MZ (and its embedding M) is independent
of W, by Theorem 3 and the established equivalence y0 “ MZ ¨ cfpvecpWqq, we have
                                                  a
                                           B̂       kpc{2qµ´1
                                 }W}2 ď ? “            ?      ¨ B “ B̃
                                             θ           θ
unless with a probability of at most p. A successful extraction outputs pW, Sq satisfying the starting
                                                                          1
relation or breaks SIS. The total knowledge error is at most δ0 “ p ` q ´k .
                  Succinct Shortness Check Under a Few Kilobytes via Tensor Train Random Projections       27

A.2    Proof of Lemma 3
Proof. We only prove the Eq.(11) here. The proof for the Eq.(12) is given in Appendix A.3. Let pJ P
Z1ˆm be the random projection row defined by pJ :“ Mat pM1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b Mµ q. The expected squared
norm of the projection is ErppJ xq2 s “ ErxJ ppJ xs “ xJ ErppJ sx. Applying Fact 1 sequentially, we
decompose pJ as
                              pJ “ M1 pId b M2 q ¨ ¨ ¨ pIdµ´1 b Mµ q ,                         (19)
where Mi :“ MatpMi q. Let σ 2 :“ VarpDghl q “ 1{2 be the variance of Dghl . Since each Mi consists
of independent entries with zero mean and variance σ 2 , we evaluate the expectations of their Gram
matrices
                                              2
                                 ErMJ
                                    1 M1 s “ σ Icd ,
                                                2
                                  ErMJ
                                     i Mi s “ cσ Icd     for 1 ă i ă µ,
                                               2
                                 ErMJ
                                    µ Mµ s “ cσ Id .

                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                1ˆcd and
   We define the partial product row vector pJ       i :“ M1 pId b M2 q ¨ ¨ ¨ pIdi´1 b Mi q P Z
                              J        i´1 2i
prove by induction that Erpi pi s “ c σ Icdi for 1 ď i ă µ. The base case pi “ 1q holds trivially.
Assume the hypothesis holds for i ´ 1. Since Mi is sampled independently of the partial product
pi´1 , we have
                 “     ‰        “`                ˘       “           ‰               ‰
               E pi pJ
                     i “ EMi        Idi´1 b MJ                   J
                                               i Epi´1 pi´1 pi´1 pIdi´1 b Mi q
                                ”`                ˘ ´ i´2 2pi´1q         ¯                 ı
                         “ EMi Idi´1 b MJ       i    c   σ       I cdi´1   pI di´1 b M i q
                         “ ci´2 σ 2pi´1q EMi Idi´1 b MJ
                                              “`               ˘                             ‰
                                                             i pIdi´1 b Ic q pIdi´1 b Mi q
                         “ ci´2 σ 2pi´1q EMi Idi´1 b MJ
                                              “         `         ˘‰
                                                             i Mi
                         “ ci´2 σ 2pi´1q Idi´1 b cσ 2 Icd “ ci´1 σ 2i Icdi .
                                         `                 ˘


    For the final term pi “ µq, applying the same decoupling strategy to pJ “ pJ  µ´1 pIdµ´1 b Mµ q
yields
                     “    ‰        “`             ˘        “          ‰         ‰
                   E ppJ “ EMµ Idµ´1 b MJ                         J
                                                µ Epµ´1 pµ´1 pµ´1 pIdµ´1 b Mµ q

                            “ cµ´2 σ 2pµ´1q Idµ´1 b ErMJ
                                           `                    ˘
                                                          µ Mµ s

                            “ cµ´2 σ 2pµ´1q Idµ´1 b cσ 2 Id “ cµ´1 σ 2µ Idµ .
                                           `               ˘

                                                                                     µ´1
    that dµ “ m and σ 2 “ 1{2, the expected matrix simplifies to ErppJ s “ c 2µ Im . Substituting
                                                             µ´1
this back into our initial formulation yields ErppJ xq2 s “ c 2µ }x}22 .

A.3    The Variance
We can establish the variance bound of the TTRP over the Dghl distribution by adapting the
indicator contraction method from [RR21]. By replacing Rademacher moments with Dghl moments.
From now on, we use mi to denoted the i-th moment of Dghl , i.e., m1 “ m3 “ 0 and m2 “ m4 “ 1{2

Lemma 7 (4-th Moment of Vector Inner Product). Let a P Zm be a random vector with
i.i.d. entries drawn from Dghl , and let b P Zm be a fixed vector. Then
                                                       3
                                          Erxa, by4 s ď }b}42
                                                       4
28      Zhiyuan Geng and Maxime Plançon

Proof. Since the odd moments of Dghl are 0, following the expansion of non-zero summands, we
have                                 ÿ                 ÿ
                       Erxa, by4 s “    Era4i sb4i ` 3   Era2i sEra2j sb2i b2j
                                              iPrms                     i‰j

Substituting the moments m2 and m4 , we get
                                                                              ˜            ¸2
                                      1ÿ 4 3ÿ 2 2 3                            ÿ                    1ÿ 4
                        Erxa, by4 s “    b `      b b “                              b2i        ´      b
                                      2 i i  4 i‰j i j  4                        i
                                                                                                    4 i i
        ř      4                                     4    3    4
Since       i bi ě 0, we get the upper bound Erxa, by s ď 4 }b}2 .

Lemma 8 (4-th Moment of Matrix Product). Let A P Zdˆc be a random matrix with i.i.d.
entries drawn from Dghl , and let B P Zpˆd be a fixed matrix. Then
                                                                  cpc ` 2q
                                          Er}BA}4F s ď                     }B}4F
                                                                      4
Proof. Let M “ BJ B. The expansion of Er}BA}4F s “ ErxM, AAJ y2 s begins                   by converting the
Frobenius norm into the trace form. By definition, }BA}2F “ trpAJ MAq “ jPrcs i1 ,i2 Prds Ai1 j Mi1 i2 Ai2 j .
                                                                                  ř        ř
Squaring this term and applying the linearity of expectation yields a joint summation over six indices
                                    ÿ        ÿ
                  Er}BA}4F s “                    ErAi1 j Ai2 j Ai3 k Ai4 k sMi1 i2 Mi3 i4
                                    i1 ,i2 ,i3 ,i4 Prds j,kPrcs

Because the entries of A are independent and have mean zero, the expectation ErAi1 j Ai2 j Ai3 k Ai4 k s
evaluates to zero if any row index appears exactly once. To yield a non-zero expectation, the row
indices must either be fully identical or paired. This partitions the non-zero outcomes into four
mutually exclusive cases
                                  ÿ ÿ
                    Er}BA}4F s “          ErA2ij A2ik sM2ii
                                     iPrds j,kPrcs
                                            ÿ         ÿ
                                     `                         ErA2i1 j A2i3 k sMi1 i1 Mi3 i3
                                         i1 ,i3 Prds j,kPrcs
                                           i1 ‰i3
                                            ÿ         ÿ
                                     `                         ErAi1 j Ai2 j Ai1 k Ai2 k sM2i1 i2
                                         i1 ,i2 Prds j,kPrcs
                                           i1 ‰i2
                                            ÿ         ÿ
                                     `                         ErAi1 j Ai2 j Ai2 k Ai1 k sMi1 i2 Mi2 i1
                                         i1 ,i2 Prds j,kPrcs
                                           i1 ‰i2

Evaluating these summations under m2 and m4 yields
                                                         2 “ cpc`1q
                           `                      ˘ř
1. For i1 “ i2 “ i3 “ i4 : c ¨ 12 ` cpc ´ 1q ¨ 41                         2.
                                                                     ř
                                                    iM   ii     4 ř i Mii
                                                    c2
                            2    1 ř                   `      2         2
                                                                           ˘
2. For i1 “ i2 ‰ i3 “ i4 : c ¨ 4ř i‰ℓ Mii Mℓℓ`“ 4 trpMq         ´  ˘ i Mii   .
                               1        2     c        2
                                                            ř    2
3. For i1 “ i3 ‰ i2 “ i4 : c ¨ 4 ři‰ℓ Miℓ “ 4 }M}    `F ´ iM   řii . ˘
4. For i1 “ i4 ‰ i2 “ i3 : c ¨ 41 i‰ℓ Miℓ Mℓi “ 4c }M}2F ´ i M2ii .
Summing all terms together
                                   c2
                                                      ˆ 2
                                                       c ` c c2
                                                                     ˙
                                              c                     c ÿ 2
                      Er}BA}4F s “    trpMq2 ` }M}2F `        ´   ´     Mii
                                  4         2             4     4   2 i
                                  c2      c           cÿ 2
                                 “ }B}4F ` }BJ B}2F ´       Mii
                                  4       2           4 i
                    Succinct Shortness Check Under a Few Kilobytes via Tensor Train Random Projections    29


    Using }BJ B}2F ď }B}4F and dropping the negative term, we obtain Er}BA}4F s ď cpc`2q  4
                                                                                     4 }B}F .

Lemma 9 (Variance). Let y “ fTTpµ,cq pxq be the single-row output of the TTRP as defined in
Definition 4. For any input x P Zmφ , we have

                                                     cpc ` 2q µ´1
                                                    ˆ        ˙
                                           4    3
                                        Ery s ď                   }x}42 ,
                                                4        4
                                                        « ˆ      ˙µ´1       ff
                                                      2        2
                                 Varpy 2 q ď Ery 2 s
                                            `       ˘
                                                         3 1`            ´1
                                                               c
                  µ´1
where Ery 2 s “ c 2µ }x}22 .

Proof. The projection y “ MatpM1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b Mµ q ¨ x can be unrolled from right to left as a sequence
of matrix-matrix and vector-matrix products. Let Yµ “ AB where A “ MatpMµ q P Zcˆdφ and
                                 µ´1
B “ rx1 , . . . , xdµ´1 s P Zdφˆd . By applying Lemma 8 iteratively for µ, µ ´ 1, . . . , 2 (a total of µ ´ 1
times), the 4-th moment scales by cpc`2q4   at each layer. Finally, M1 P Z1ˆdc acts as a row vector, so
applying Lemma 7 yields the final bounding factor of 43
                                                        ˆ              ˙µ´1
                                           4    3           cpc ` 2q
                                        Ery s ď                               }x}42
                                                4               4

    The variance is then bounded by

                                                              cpc ` 2q µ´1
                                                               ˆ       ˙
                           2        4          23   2
                                                                                          ˘2
                                                                           }x}42 ´ Ery 2 s
                                                                                  `
                    Varpy q “ Ery s ´ pEry sq ď
                                                4                  4
                                                                     « ˆ     ˙µ´1    ff
                                                                           2
                                                        “ pEry 2 sq2 3 1 `        ´1 .
                                                                           c
